en-->Love is a variety of different emotional and mental states, typically strongly and positively experienced, that ranges from deepest interpersonal affection to simple pleasure. An example of this range of meanings is that the love of a mother differs from the love of a spouse differs from the love of food. Most commonly, love refers to an emotion of a strong attraction and personal attachment. Love can also be a virtue representing human kindness, compassion, and affection—"the unselfish loyal and benevolent concern for the good of another". It may also describe compassionate and affectionate actions towards other humans, one's self or animals.
en-->Ancient Greek philosophers identified four forms of love: essentially, familial love (in Greek, storge), friendly love (philia), romantic love (eros), and divine love (agape). Modern authors have distinguished further varieties of love: infatuated love, self-love, and courtly love. Non-Western traditions have also distinguished variants or symbioses of these states. Love has additional religious or spiritual meaning. This diversity of uses and meanings combined with the complexity of the feelings involved makes love unusually difficult to consistently define, compared to other emotional states.
en-->Love in its various forms acts as a major facilitator of interpersonal relationships and, owing to its central psychological importance, is one of the most common themes in the creative arts.
en-->Love may be understood as a function to keep human beings together against menaces and to facilitate the continuation of the species.
en-->The word "love" can have a variety of related but distinct meanings in different contexts. Many other languages use multiple words to express some of the different concepts that in English are denoted as "love"; one example is the plurality of Greek words for "love" which includes agape and eros. Cultural differences in conceptualizing love thus doubly impede the establishment of a universal definition.
en-->Although the nature or essence of love is a subject of frequent debate, different aspects of the word can be clarified by determining what isn't love (antonyms of "love"). Love as a general expression of positive sentiment (a stronger form of like) is commonly contrasted with hate (or neutral apathy); as a less sexual and more emotionally intimate form of romantic attachment, love is commonly contrasted with lust; and as an interpersonal relationship with romantic overtones, love is sometimes contrasted with friendship, although the word love is often applied to close friendships. (Further possible ambiguities come with usages "girlfriend", "boyfriend", "just good friends").
en-->Abstractly discussed love usually refers to an experience one person feels for another. Love often involves caring for, or identifying with, a person or thing (cf. vulnerability and care theory of love), including oneself (cf. narcissism). In addition to cross-cultural differences in understanding love, ideas about love have also changed greatly over time. Some historians date modern conceptions of romantic love to courtly Europe during or after the Middle Ages, although the prior existence of romantic attachments is attested by ancient love poetry.
en-->The complex and abstract nature of love often reduces discourse of love to a thought-terminating cliché. Several common proverbs regard love, from Virgil's "Love conquers all" to The Beatles' "All You Need Is Love". St. Thomas Aquinas, following Aristotle, defines love as "to will the good of another." Bertrand Russell describes love as a condition of "absolute value," as opposed to relative value. Philosopher Gottfried Leibniz said that love is "to be delighted by the happiness of another." Meher Baba stated that in love there is a "feeling of unity" and an "active appreciation of the intrinsic worth of the object of love." Biologist Jeremy Griffith defines love as "unconditional selflessness".
en-->People can be said to love an object, principle, or goal to which they are deeply committed and greatly value. For example, compassionate outreach and volunteer workers' "love" of their cause may sometimes be born not of interpersonal love but impersonal love, altruism, and strong spiritual or political convictions. People can also "love" material objects, animals, or activities if they invest themselves in bonding or otherwise identifying with those things. If sexual passion is also involved, then this feeling is called paraphilia. A common principle that people say they love is life itself.
en-->Interpersonal love refers to love between human beings. It is a much more potent sentiment than a simple liking for a person. Unrequited love refers to those feelings of love that are not reciprocated. Interpersonal love is most closely associated with interpersonal relationships. Such love might exist between family members, friends, and couples. There are also a number of psychological disorders related to love, such as erotomania.
en-->Throughout history, philosophy and religion have done the most speculation on the phenomenon of love. In the 20th century, the science of psychology has written a great deal on the subject. In recent years, the sciences of psychology, anthropology, neuroscience, and biology have added to the understanding the concept of love.
en-->Biological models of sex tend to view love as a mammalian drive, much like hunger or thirst. Helen Fisher, a leading expert in the topic of love, divides the experience of love into three partly overlapping stages: lust, attraction, and attachment. Lust is the feeling of sexual desire; romantic attraction determines what partners mates find attractive and pursue, conserving time and energy by choosing; and attachment involves sharing a home, parental duties, mutual defense, and in humans involves feelings of safety and security. Three distinct neural circuitries, including neurotransmitters, and three behavioral patterns, are associated with these three romantic styles.
en-->Lust is the initial passionate sexual desire that promotes mating, and involves the increased release of chemicals such as testosterone and estrogen. These effects rarely last more than a few weeks or months. Attraction is the more individualized and romantic desire for a specific candidate for mating, which develops out of lust as commitment to an individual mate forms. Recent studies in neuroscience have indicated that as people fall in love, the brain consistently releases a certain set of chemicals, including the neurotransmitter hormones, dopamine, norepinephrine, and serotonin, the same compounds released by amphetamine, stimulating the brain's pleasure center and leading to side effects such as increased heart rate, loss of appetite and sleep, and an intense feeling of excitement. Research has indicated that this stage generally lasts from one and a half to three years.
en-->Since the lust and attraction stages are both considered temporary, a third stage is needed to account for long-term relationships. Attachment is the bonding that promotes relationships lasting for many years and even decades. Attachment is generally based on commitments such as marriage and children, or on mutual friendship based on things like shared interests. It has been linked to higher levels of the chemicals oxytocin and vasopressin to a greater degree than short-term relationships have. Enzo Emanuele and coworkers reported the protein molecule known as the nerve growth factor (NGF) has high levels when people first fall in love, but these return to previous levels after one year.
en-->Psychology depicts love as a cognitive and social phenomenon. Psychologist Robert Sternberg formulated a triangular theory of love and argued that love has three different components: intimacy, commitment, and passion. Intimacy is a form in which two people share confidences and various details of their personal lives, and is usually shown in friendships and romantic love affairs. Commitment, on the other hand, is the expectation that the relationship is permanent. The last form of love is sexual attraction and passion. Passionate love is shown in infatuation as well as romantic love. All forms of love are viewed as varying combinations of these three components. Non-love does not include any of these components. Liking only includes intimacy. Infatuated love only includes passion. Empty love only includes commitment. Romantic love includes both intimacy and passion. Companionate love includes intimacy and commitment. Fatuous love includes passion and commitment. Lastly, consummate love includes all three. American psychologist Zick Rubin sought to define love by psychometrics in the 1970s. His work states that three factors constitute love: attachment, caring, and intimacy.
en-->Following developments in electrical theories such as Coulomb's law, which showed that positive and negative charges attract, analogs in human life were developed, such as "opposites attract". Over the last century, research on the nature of human mating has generally found this not to be true when it comes to character and personality—people tend to like people similar to themselves. However, in a few unusual and specific domains, such as immune systems, it seems that humans prefer others who are unlike themselves (e.g., with an orthogonal immune system), since this will lead to a baby that has the best of both worlds. In recent years, various human bonding theories have been developed, described in terms of attachments, ties, bonds, and affinities. Some Western authorities disaggregate into two main components, the altruistic and the narcissistic. This view is represented in the works of Scott Peck, whose work in the field of applied psychology explored the definitions of love and evil. Peck maintains that love is a combination of the "concern for the spiritual growth of another," and simple narcissism. In combination, love is an activity, not simply a feeling.
en-->Psychologist Erich Fromm maintained in his book The Art of Loving that love is not merely a feeling but is also actions, and that in fact, the "feeling" of love is superficial in comparison to one's commitment to love via a series of loving actions over time. In this sense, Fromm held that love is ultimately not a feeling at all, but rather is a commitment to, and adherence to, loving actions towards another, oneself, or many others, over a sustained duration. Fromm also described love as a conscious choice that in its early stages might originate as an involuntary feeling, but which then later no longer depends on those feelings, but rather depends only on conscious commitment.
en-->Evolutionary psychology has attempted to provide various reasons for love as a survival tool. Humans are dependent on parental help for a large portion of their lifespans compared to other mammals. Love has therefore been seen as a mechanism to promote parental support of children for this extended time period. Another factor may be that sexually transmitted diseases can cause, among other effects, permanently reduced fertility, injury to the fetus, and increase complications during childbirth. This would favor monogamous relationships over polygamy.
en-->Biological models of love tend to see it as a mammalian drive, similar to hunger or thirst. Psychology sees love as more of a social and cultural phenomenon. Certainly love is influenced by hormones (such as oxytocin), neurotrophins (such as NGF), and pheromones, and how people think and behave in love is influenced by their conceptions of love. The conventional view in biology is that there are two major drives in love: sexual attraction and attachment. Attachment between adults is presumed to work on the same principles that lead an infant to become attached to its mother. The traditional psychological view sees love as being a combination of companionate love and passionate love. Passionate love is intense longing, and is often accompanied by physiological arousal (shortness of breath, rapid heart rate); companionate love is affection and a feeling of intimacy not accompanied by physiological arousal.
en-->Greek distinguishes several different senses in which the word "love" is used. Ancient Greeks identified four forms of love: kinship or familiarity (in Greek, storge), friendship and/or platonic desire (philia), sexual and/or romantic desire (eros), and self-emptying or divine love (agape). Modern authors have distinguished further varieties of romantic love. However, with Greek (as with many other languages), it has been historically difficult to separate the meanings of these words totally. At the same time, the Ancient Greek text of the Bible has examples of the verb agapo having the same meaning as phileo.
en-->Agape (ἀγάπη agápē) means love in modern-day Greek. The term s'agapo means I love you in Greek. The word agapo is the verb I love. It generally refers to a "pure," ideal type of love, rather than the physical attraction suggested by eros. However, there are some examples of agape used to mean the same as eros. It has also been translated as "love of the soul."
en-->Eros (ἔρως érōs) (from the Greek deity Eros) is passionate love, with sensual desire and longing. The Greek word erota means in love. Plato refined his own definition. Although eros is initially felt for a person, with contemplation it becomes an appreciation of the beauty within that person, or even becomes appreciation of beauty itself. Eros helps the soul recall knowledge of beauty and contributes to an understanding of spiritual truth. Lovers and philosophers are all inspired to seek truth by eros. Some translations list it as "love of the body".
en-->Philia (φιλία philía), a dispassionate virtuous love, was a concept addressed and developed by Aristotle in his Nicomachean Ethics Book VIII. It includes loyalty to friends, family, and community, and requires virtue, equality, and familiarity. Philia is motivated by practical reasons; one or both of the parties benefit from the relationship. It can also mean "love of the mind."
en-->Storge (στοργή storgē) is natural affection, like that felt by parents for offspring.
en-->Xenia (ξενία xenía), hospitality, was an extremely important practice in ancient Greece. It was an almost ritualized friendship formed between a host and his guest, who could previously have been strangers. The host fed and provided quarters for the guest, who was expected to repay only with gratitude. The importance of this can be seen throughout Greek mythology—in particular, Homer's Iliad and Odyssey.
en-->The Latin language has several different verbs corresponding to the English word "love." amō is the basic verb meaning I love, with the infinitive amare (“to love”) as it still is in Italian today. The Romans used it both in an affectionate sense as well as in a romantic or sexual sense. From this verb come amans—a lover, amator, "professional lover," often with the accessory notion of lechery—and amica, "girlfriend" in the English sense, often being applied euphemistically to a prostitute. The corresponding noun is amor (the significance of this term for the Romans is well illustrated in the fact, that the name of the City, Rome—in Latin: Roma—can be viewed as an anagram for amor, which was used as the secret name of the City in wide circles in ancient times), which is also used in the plural form to indicate love affairs or sexual adventures. This same root also produces amicus—"friend"—and amicitia, "friendship" (often based to mutual advantage, and corresponding sometimes more closely to "indebtedness" or "influence"). Cicero wrote a treatise called On Friendship (de Amicitia), which discusses the notion at some length. Ovid wrote a guide to dating called Ars Amatoria (The Art of Love), which addresses, in depth, everything from extramarital affairs to overprotective parents.
en-->Latin sometimes uses amāre where English would simply say to like. This notion, however, is much more generally expressed in Latin by the terms placere or delectāre, which are used more colloquially, the latter used frequently in the love poetry of Catullus. Diligere often has the notion "to be affectionate for," "to esteem," and rarely if ever is used for romantic love. This word would be appropriate to describe the friendship of two men. The corresponding noun diligentia, however, has the meaning of "diligence" or "carefulness," and has little semantic overlap with the verb. Observare is a synonym for diligere; despite the cognate with English, this verb and its corresponding noun, observantia, often denote "esteem" or "affection." Caritas is used in Latin translations of the Christian Bible to mean "charitable love"; this meaning, however, is not found in Classical pagan Roman literature. As it arises from a conflation with a Greek word, there is no corresponding verb.
en-->Two philosophical underpinnings of love exist in the Chinese tradition, one from Confucianism which emphasized actions and duty while the other came from Mohism which championed a universal love. A core concept to Confucianism is Ren ("benevolent love", 仁), which focuses on duty, action and attitude in a relationship rather than love itself. In Confucianism, one displays benevolent love by performing actions such as filial piety from children, kindness from parent, loyalty to the king and so forth.
en-->The concept of Ai (愛) was developed by the Chinese philosopher Mozi in the 4th century BC in reaction to Confucianism's benevolent love. Mozi tried to replace what he considered to be the long-entrenched Chinese over-attachment to family and clan structures with the concept of "universal love" (jiān'ài, 兼愛). In this, he argued directly against Confucians who believed that it was natural and correct for people to care about different people in different degrees. Mozi, by contrast, believed people in principle should care for all people equally. Mohism stressed that rather than adopting different attitudes towards different people, love should be unconditional and offered to everyone without regard to reciprocation, not just to friends, family and other Confucian relations. Later in Chinese Buddhism, the term Ai (愛) was adopted to refer to a passionate caring love and was considered a fundamental desire. In Buddhism, Ai was seen as capable of being either selfish or selfless, the latter being a key element towards enlightenment.
en-->In contemporary Chinese, Ai (愛) is often used as the equivalent of the Western concept of love. Ai is used as both a verb (e.g. wo ai ni 我愛你, or "I love you") and a noun (such as aiqing 愛情, or "romantic love"). However, due to the influence of Confucian Ren, the phrase 'Wo ai ni' (I love you) carries with it a very specific sense of responsibility, commitment and loyalty. Instead of frequently saying "I love you" as in some Western societies, the Chinese are more likely to express feelings of affection in a more casual way. Consequently, "I like you" (Wo xihuan ni, 我喜欢你) is a more common way of expressing affection in Chinese; it is more playful and less serious. This is also true in Japanese (suki da, 好きだ). The Chinese are also more likely to say "I love you" in English or other foreign languages than they would in their mother tongue.
en-->The Japanese language uses three words to convey the English equivalent of "love". Because "love" covers a wide range of emotions and behavioral phenomena, there are nuances distinguishing the three terms. The term ai (愛), which is often associated with maternal love or selfless love, originally referred to beauty and was often used in religious context. Following the Meiji Restoration 1868, the term became associated with "love" in order to translate Western literature. Prior to Western influence, the term koi (恋) generally represented romantic love, and was often the subject of the popular Man'yōshū Japanese poetry collection. Koi describes a longing for a member of the opposite sex and is typical interpreted as selfish and wanting. The term's origins come from the concept of lonely solitude as a result of separation from a loved one. Though modern usage of koi focuses on sexual love and infatuation, the Manyō used the term to cover a wider range of situations, including tenderness, benevolence, and material desire. The third term, ren'ai (恋愛), is a more modern construction that combines the kanji characters for both ai and koi, though its usage more closely resembles that of koi in the form of romantic love.
en-->Rumi, Hafiz and Sa'di are icons of the passion and love that the Persian culture and language present. The Persian word for love is Ishq, which is derived from Arabic language, however it is considered by most to be too stalwart a term for interpersonal love and is more commonly substituted for "doost dashtan" ("liking"). In the Persian culture, everything is encompassed by love and all is for love, starting from loving friends and family, husbands and wives, and eventually reaching the divine love that is the ultimate goal in life.
en-->In Turkish, the word "love" comes up with several meanings. A person can love a god, a person, parents, or family. But that person can "love" just one special person, which they call the word "aşk." Aşk (a word of Arabic origin) is a feeling for to love, or being "in love" (Aşık), as it still is in Turkish today. The Turks used this word just for their loves in a romantic or sexual sense. If a Turk says that he is in love (Aşık) with somebody, it is not a love that a person can feel for his or her parents; it is just for one person, and it indicates a huge infatuation. The word is also common for Turkic languages, such as Azerbaijani (eşq) and Kazakh (ғашық).
en-->The Christian understanding is that love comes from God. The love of man and woman—eros in Greek—and the unselfish love of others (agape), are often contrasted as "descending" and "ascending" love, respectively, but are ultimately the same thing.
en-->There are several Greek words for "love" that are regularly referred to in Christian circles.
en-->Agape: In the New Testament, agapē is charitable, selfless, altruistic, and unconditional. It is parental love, seen as creating goodness in the world; it is the way God is seen to love humanity, and it is seen as the kind of love that Christians aspire to have for one another.
en-->Phileo: Also used in the New Testament, phileo is a human response to something that is found to be delightful. Also known as "brotherly love."
en-->Two other words for love in the Greek language, eros (sexual love) and storge (child-to-parent love), were never used in the New Testament.
en-->Christians believe that to Love God with all your heart, mind, and strength and Love your neighbor as yourself are the two most important things in life (the greatest commandment of the Jewish Torah, according to Jesus; cf. Gospel of Mark chapter 12, verses 28–34). Saint Augustine summarized this when he wrote "Love God, and do as thou wilt."
en-->The Apostle Paul glorified love as the most important virtue of all. Describing love in the famous poetic interpretation in 1 Corinthians, he wrote, "Love is patient, love is kind. It does not envy, it does not boast, it is not proud. It is not rude, it is not self-seeking, it is not easily angered, it keeps no record of wrongs. Love does not delight in evil but rejoices with the truth. It always protects, always trusts, always hopes, and always perseveres." (1 Cor. 13:4–7, NIV)
en-->The Apostle John wrote, "For God so loved the world that he gave his one and only Son, that whoever believes in him shall not perish but have eternal life. For God did not send his Son into the world to condemn the world, but to save the world through him." (John 3:16–17, NIV) John also wrote, "Dear friends, let us love one another for love comes from God. Everyone who loves has been born of God and knows God. Whoever does not love does not know God, because God is love." (1 John 4:7–8, NIV)
en-->Saint Augustine says that one must be able to decipher the difference between love and lust. Lust, according to Saint Augustine, is an overindulgence, but to love and be loved is what he has sought for his entire life. He even says, “I was in love with love.” Finally, he does fall in love and is loved back, by God. Saint Augustine says the only one who can love you truly and fully is God, because love with a human only allows for flaws such as “jealousy, suspicion, fear, anger, and contention.” According to Saint Augustine, to love God is “to attain the peace which is yours.” (Saint Augustine's Confessions)
en-->Augustine regards the duplex commandment of love in Matthew 22 as the heart of Christian faith and the interpretation of the Bible. After the review of Christian doctrine, Augustine treats the problem of love in terms of use and enjoyment until the end of Book I of De Doctrina Christiana (1.22.21-1.40.44;).
en-->Christian theologians see God as the source of love, which is mirrored in humans and their own loving relationships. Influential Christian theologian C.S. Lewis wrote a book called The Four Loves. Benedict XVI wrote his first encyclical on "God is love". He said that a human being, created in the image of God, who is love, is able to practice love; to give himself to God and others (agape) and by receiving and experiencing God's love in contemplation (eros). This life of love, according to him, is the life of the saints such as Teresa of Calcutta and the Blessed Virgin Mary and is the direction Christians take when they believe that God loves them.
en-->In Christianity the practical definition of love is best summarised by St. Thomas Aquinas, who defined love as "to will the good of another," or to desire for another to succeed. This is the explanation of the Christian need to love others, including their enemies. As Thomas Aquinas explains, Christian love is motivated by the need to see others succeed in life, to be good people.
en-->Regarding love for enemies, Jesus is quoted in the Gospel of Matthew chapter five:
en-->“You have heard that it was said, ‘Love your neighbor and hate your enemy.’ But I tell you, love your enemies and pray for those who persecute you, that you may be children of your Father in heaven. He causes his sun to rise on the evil and the good, and sends rain on the righteous and the unrighteous. If you love those who love you, what reward will you get? Are not even the tax collectors doing that? And if you greet only your own people, what are you doing more than others? Do not even pagans do that? Be perfect, therefore, as your heavenly Father is perfect.” - Matthew 5: 43-48
en-->Tertullian wrote regarding love for enemies: “Our individual, extraordinary, and perfect goodness consists in loving our enemies. To love one's friends is common practice, to love one's enemies only among Christians.”
en-->In Hebrew, אהבה (ahava) is the most commonly used term for both interpersonal love and love between God and God's creations. Chesed, often translated as loving-kindness, is used to describe many forms of love between human beings.
en-->The commandment to love other people is given in the Torah, which states, "Love your neighbor like yourself" (Leviticus 19:18). The Torah's commandment to love God "with all your heart, with all your soul and with all your might" (Deuteronomy 6:5) is taken by the Mishnah (a central text of the Jewish oral law) to refer to good deeds, willingness to sacrifice one's life rather than commit certain serious transgressions, willingness to sacrifice all of one's possessions, and being grateful to the Lord despite adversity (tractate Berachoth 9:5). Rabbinic literature differs as to how this love can be developed, e.g., by contemplating divine deeds or witnessing the marvels of nature. As for love between marital partners, this is deemed an essential ingredient to life: "See life with the wife you love" (Ecclesiastes 9:9). The biblical book Song of Solomon is considered a romantically phrased metaphor of love between God and his people, but in its plain reading, reads like a love song. The 20th-century Rabbi Eliyahu Eliezer Dessler is frequently quoted as defining love from the Jewish point of view as "giving without expecting to take" (from his Michtav me-Eliyahu, Vol. 1).
en-->Love encompasses the Islamic view of life as universal brotherhood that applies to all who hold faith. Amongst the 99 names of God (Allah), there is the name Al-Wadud, or "the Loving One," which is found in Surah [Quran 11:90] as well as Surah [Quran 85:14]. God is also referenced at the beginning of every chapter in the Qur'an as Ar-Rahman and Ar-Rahim, or the "Most Compassionate" and the "Most Merciful", indicating that nobody is more loving, compassionate and benevolent than God. The Qur'an refers to God as being "full of loving kindness."
en-->The Qur'an exhorts Muslim believers to treat all people, those who have not persecuted them, with birr or "deep kindness" as stated in Surah [Quran 6:8-9]. Birr is also used by the Qur'an in describing the love and kindness that children must show to their parents.
en-->Ishq, or divine love, is the emphasis of Sufism in the Islamic tradition. Practitioners of Sufism believe that love is a projection of the essence of God to the universe. God desires to recognize beauty, and as if one looks at a mirror to see oneself, God "looks" at himself within the dynamics of nature. Since everything is a reflection of God, the school of Sufism practices to see the beauty inside the apparently ugly. Sufism is often referred to as the religion of love. God in Sufism is referred to in three main terms, which are the Lover, Loved, and Beloved, with the last of these terms being often seen in Sufi poetry. A common viewpoint of Sufism is that through love, humankind can get back to its inherent purity and grace. The saints of Sufism are infamous for being "drunk" due to their love of God; hence, the constant reference to wine in Sufi poetry and music.
en-->In his Paris Talks, `Abdu'l-Bahá described four types of love: the love that flows from God to human beings; the love that flows from human beings to God; the love of God towards the Self or Identity of God; and the love of human beings for human beings.
en-->In Buddhism, Kāma is sensuous, sexual love. It is an obstacle on the path to enlightenment, since it is selfish. Karuṇā is compassion and mercy, which reduces the suffering of others. It is complementary to wisdom and is necessary for enlightenment. Adveṣa and mettā are benevolent love. This love is unconditional and requires considerable self-acceptance. This is quite different from ordinary love, which is usually about attachment and sex and which rarely occurs without self-interest. Instead, in Buddhism it refers to detachment and unselfish interest in others' welfare.
en-->The Bodhisattva ideal in Mahayana Buddhism involves the complete renunciation of oneself in order to take on the burden of a suffering world. The strongest motivation one has in order to take the path of the Bodhisattva is the idea of salvation within unselfish, altruistic love for all sentient beings.
en-->In Hinduism, kāma is pleasurable, sexual love, personified by the god Kamadeva. For many Hindu schools, it is the third end (Kama) in life. Kamadeva is often pictured holding a bow of sugar cane and an arrow of flowers; he may ride upon a great parrot. He is usually accompanied by his consort Rati and his companion Vasanta, lord of the spring season. Stone images of Kamadeva and Rati can be seen on the door of the Chennakeshava temple at Belur, in Karnataka, India. Maara is another name for kāma.
en-->In contrast to kāma, prema – or prem – refers to elevated love. Karuna is compassion and mercy, which impels one to help reduce the suffering of others. Bhakti is a Sanskrit term, meaning "loving devotion to the supreme God." A person who practices bhakti is called a bhakta. Hindu writers, theologians, and philosophers have distinguished nine forms of bhakti, which can be found in the Bhagavata Purana and works by Tulsidas. The philosophical work Narada Bhakti Sutras, written by an unknown author (presumed to be Narada), distinguishes eleven forms of love.
en-->In certain Vaishnava sects within Hinduism, attaining unadulterated, unconditional and incessant love for Godhead is considered the foremost goal of life. Gaudiya Vaishnavas who worship Krishna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the cause of all causes consider Love for Godhead (Prema) to act in two ways: sambhoga and vipralambha (union and separation)—two opposites .
en-->In the condition of separation, there is an acute yearning for being with the beloved and in the condition of union there is supreme happiness and nectarean. Gaudiya Vaishnavas consider that Krishna-prema (Love for Godhead) is not fire but that it still burns away one's material desires. They consider that Kṛṣṇa-prema is not a weapon, but it still pierces the heart. It is not water, but it washes away everything—one's pride, religious rules, and one's shyness. Krishna-prema is considered to make one drown in the ocean of transcendental ecstasy and pleasure. The love of Radha, a cowherd girl, for Krishna is often cited as the supreme example of love for Godhead by Gaudiya Vaishnavas. Radha is considered to be the internal potency of Krishna, and is the supreme lover of Godhead. Her example of love is considered to be beyond the understanding of material realm as it surpasses any form of selfish love or lust that is visible in the material world. The reciprocal love between Radha (the supreme lover) and Krishna (God as the Supremely Loved) is the subject of many poetic compositions in India such as the Gita Govinda and Hari Bhakti Shuddhodhaya.
en-->In the Bhakti tradition within Hinduism, it is believed that execution of devotional service to God leads to the development of Love for God (taiche bhakti-phale krsne prema upajaya), and as love for God increases in the heart, the more one becomes free from material contamination (krishna-prema asvada haile, bhava nasa paya). Being perfectly in love with God or Krishna makes one perfectly free from material contamination. and this is the ultimate way of salvation or liberation. In this tradition, salvation or liberation is considered inferior to love, and just an incidental by-product. Being absorbed in Love for God is considered to be the perfection of life.
en-->The term free love has been used to describe a social movement that rejects marriage, which is seen as a form of social bondage. The Free Love movement's initial goal was to separate the state from sexual matters such as marriage, birth control, and adultery. It claimed that such issues were the concern of the people involved, and no one else.
en-->Many people in the early 19th century believed that marriage was an important aspect of life to "fulfill earthly human happiness." Middle-class Americans wanted the home to be a place of stability in an uncertain world. This mentality created a vision of strongly defined gender roles, which provoked the advancement of the free love movement as a contrast.
en-->The term "sex radical" is also used interchangeably with the term "free lover", and was the preferred term by advocates because of the negative connotations of "free love". By whatever name, advocates had two strong beliefs: opposition to the idea of forceful sexual activity in a relationship and advocacy for a woman to use her body in any way that she pleases. These are also beliefs of Feminism.
en-->The philosophy of love is a field of social philosophy and ethics that attempts to explain the nature of love. The philosophical investigation of love includes the tasks of distinguishing between the various kinds of personal love, asking if and how love is or can be justified, asking what the value of love is, and what impact love has on the autonomy of both the lover and the beloved.
en-->Many different theories attempt to explain the nature and function of love. Explaining love to a hypothetical person who had not himself or herself experienced love or being loved would be very difficult because to such a person love would appear to be quite strange if not outright irrational behavior. Among the prevailing types of theories that attempt to account for the existence of love are: psychological theories, the vast majority of which consider love to be very healthy behavior; evolutionary theories which hold that love is part of the process of natural selection; spiritual theories which may, for instance consider love to be a gift from a god; and theories that consider love to be an unexplainable mystery, very much like a mystical experience.
en-->There were many attempts to find the equation of love. One such attempt was by Christian Rudder, a mathematician and co-founder of online dating website OKCupid, one of the largest online dating sites. The mathematical approach was through the collection of large data from the dating site. Another interesting equation of love is found by in the philosophical blog 'In the Quest of Truth'. Love is defined as a measure of selfless give and take, and the author attempted to draw a graph that shows the equation of love. Aggregately, dating resources indicate a nascent line of variables effectively synchronising couples in naturally determined yearning.
en-->Some scientists hold the view that love is caused by the hormone oxytocin being released in to the body, and that love does not truly exist, and that instead it is an evolutionary instinct.
en-->Love at first sight
en-->Polyamory
en-->Romance (love)
en-->Bayer, A, ed. (2008). Art and love in Renaissance Italy. New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art. 
en-->Friendship at DMOZ
en-->Philanthropy at DMOZ
en-->Romance at DMOZ
fr-->L'amour désigne un sentiment d'affection et d'attachement envers un être vivant ou une chose qui pousse ceux qui le ressentent à rechercher une proximité physique, spirituelle ou même imaginaire avec l'objet de cet amour et à adopter un comportement particulier.
fr-->En tant que concept général, l'amour renvoie la plupart du temps à un profond sentiment de tendresse envers une personne. Toutefois, même cette conception spécifique de l'amour comprend un large éventail de sentiments différents, allant du désir passionné et de l'amour romantique, à la tendre proximité sans sexualité de l'amour familial ou de l'amour platonique et à la dévotion spirituelle de l'amour religieux. L'amour sous ses diverses formes agit comme un facteur majeur dans les relations sociales et occupe une place centrale dans la psychologie humaine, ce qui en fait également l'un des thèmes les plus courants dans l'art.
fr-->Le verbe français « aimer » peut renvoyer à une grande variété de sentiments, d'états et de comportements, allant d'un plaisir général lié à un objet ou à une activité (« j'aime le chocolat », « j'aime danser ») à une attirance profonde ou intense pour une personne (« Roméo aime Juliette ») ou plusieurs personnes (« Il aime ses enfants »). Cette diversité d'emplois et de significations du mot le rend difficile à définir de façon unie et universelle, même en le comparant à d'autres états émotionnels.
fr-->Le mot français « amour », comme le verbe « aimer » qui lui est relatif, recouvre une large variété de significations distinctes quoique liées. Ainsi, le français utilise le même verbe pour exprimer ce que d'autres langues expriment par des verbes différents : « j’aime ma femme » et « j’aime les sucreries » par exemple (alors qu'en anglais, on dira respectivement « to love » et « to like » et, en espagnol, « querer » ou « amar » et « gustar »). On constate aussi une telle variété pour le mot « amour », par exemple dans la pluralité des mots grecs désignant l’« amour ». Les différences culturelles dans la conception de l'amour redoublent donc la difficulté d'en donner une définition universelle. Le substantif « amour » a néanmoins une extension moins large que le verbe « aimer » : on parlera rarement, par exemple, d'« amour » des sucreries, même si l'on dit les « aimer ». Le sens du verbe « aimer », qui peut aussi exprimer l'amitié, ou plus simplement une affection pour quelque chose qui est source de plaisir, est donc plus large que celui du mot « amour ».
fr-->Bien que la nature ou l’essence de l'amour soit un sujet de débats, on peut éclaircir plusieurs aspects de cette notion en s'appuyant sur ce que l'amour n'est pas. En tant qu'il exprime un sentiment fort et positif, on l'oppose communément à la haine, voire à l'indifférence, la neutralité ou l'apathie. En tant que sentiment, plus spirituel que physique, on l'oppose souvent au sexe ou au désir sexuel. En tant que relation privilégiée et de nature romantique avec une personne, on le distingue souvent de l'amitié, bien que l'amitié puisse être définie comme une forme d'amour, et que certaines définitions de l'amour s'appliquent à une proche amitié.
fr-->L'amour désigne un fort attachement affectif à quelqu'un ou à quelque chose. S'il renvoie souvent, dans l'usage courant, aux relations humaines, et plus précisément à ce qu'une personne ressent pour une autre, l'amour peut néanmoins aussi être « impersonnel » : il est en effet possible de dire qu'une personne éprouve de l'amour pour un pays (par exemple son propre pays : voir Patriotisme), pour la nature, ou encore pour un principe ou un idéal, si elle lui accorde une grande valeur et qu'elle s'y sent très attachée. De même, on peut ressentir de l’amour pour un objet matériel, un animal ou une activité, si l'on entretient des liens affectifs forts ou étroits avec ces objets (ou qu'on s'identifie à eux). Lorsque l'amour d'un objet devient exclusif, voire excessif ou pervers, on parle de fétichisme ou d'idolâtrie.
fr-->L'amour entre les personnes, quant à lui, est un sentiment généralement plus intense qu'un simple sentiment amical ou affectueux. Il peut cependant se présenter sous différentes formes et à des degrés d'intensité divers, de la simple tendresse (quand on dit « aimer » les enfants, par exemple) au désir le plus ardent (chez les amants passionnés par exemple). Ainsi, l'amour entre les membres d'une même famille n'est pas le même qu'entre des amis ou au sein d'un couple d'amoureux. Quand il est ressenti avec une grande intensité et qu'il exerce un fort pouvoir érotique (ou une attirance sexuelle), on parle d'amour « passionnel » ou de « passion amoureuse », utilisant souvent l'image de la flamme ou de la brûlure pour décrire l'effet qu'il exerce sur les sens et l'esprit. Quand cette passion provoque une identification si étroite avec une personne qu'elle tend à unifier les deux amants, on parle d'amour « fusionnel ».
fr-->L'apparition plus ou moins subite de l'amour passionnel est décrite dans la langue courante comme un dessaisissement (« tomber amoureux », « coup de foudre »), provoquant chez celui qui l'éprouve des comportements destinés à séduire l'être aimé et visant à obtenir la réciprocité de cet amour, qui s'exprimera le cas échéant par des actions et des gestes amoureux – parmi lesquels les caresses, les baisers et les rapports sexuels, ces derniers étant désignés dans plusieurs langues par l'expression « faire l'amour ». Ces pratiques et ces gestes sont en partie culturels et peuvent faire l'objet – tout comme l'étude des interdits liés à l'amour – d'une approche anthropologique ou sociologique.
fr-->Outre les différences culturelles dans les pratiques liées à l'amour, les idées et les représentations sur l'amour ont également beaucoup changé selon les époques. L'amour platonique, l'amour courtois et l'amour romantique sont ainsi des conceptions distinctes et apparues à des époques précises de l'Histoire. Il existe aussi un certain nombre de désordres psychiques liés à l'amour, et étudiés par la psychologie, comme l'érotomanie ou le narcissisme. Certaines formes d'amour sont par ailleurs perçues comme des perversions ou des déviances (voir paraphilie), telles que la pédophilie (attirance sexuelle pour les enfants) et la zoophilie (attirance sexuelle pour les animaux). De telles amours peuvent être étudiées aussi bien par la psychologie que par les sciences humaines et sociales.
fr-->À cause de la nature complexe et difficile à saisir de l'amour, les discours sur l'amour se réduisent souvent à des clichés, que l'on retrouve dans un certain nombre de dictons sur l'amour, depuis la phrase du poète Virgile : « L'amour triomphe de tout (omnia vincit amor) », jusqu'au célèbre : « L'amour rend aveugle ». Le philosophe Leibniz en donnait cette définition : « Aimer, c'est trouver plaisir au bonheur d'autrui ».
fr-->Dans l'Histoire, la philosophie et la religion (ainsi que la théologie qui lui est liée) ont beaucoup médité sur le phénomène amoureux, source constante d'inspiration pour les arts plastiques, littéraires et musicaux. La psychologie, au siècle dernier, a renouvelé les réflexions sur le sujet. Ces dernières années, des sciences telles que la biologie, la neurologie et les neurosciences, mais aussi la zoologie et l'anthropologie, ont amélioré notre compréhension de la nature et de la fonction de l'amour.
fr-->Le terme est employé au XIIIe siècle en langue française sous la forme amor, une forme venant du latin. On le note dès les Serments de Strasbourg (842) dans une forme romane dans la locution Pro deo amur (pour l'amour de dieu).
fr-->Le terme amour recouvre quatre sentiments distincts de la Grèce antique : l'éros, la philia, l'agapè et la storgê.
fr-->La philia se rapproche de l'amitié telle qu'on l'entend aujourd'hui, c'est une forte estime réciproque entre deux personnes de statuts sociaux proches. Elle ne pouvait exister à l'époque qu'entre deux personnes du même sexe, du fait de l'inégalité entre les sexes. C'est une extension de l'amitié.
fr-->L'éros désigne l'attirance sexuelle, le désir. Dans la pensée platonicienne, il est parfois vu comme l'une des passions néfastes que produit l'épithumia (ou « appétit »), mais aussi comme une « divine folie » qui est « la cause des plus grands biens pour les hommes ». Cependant il pouvait se mêler à la philia à travers la pédérastie, qui liait un amant d'âge mûr (« éraste ») à un jeune aimé (« éromène »).
fr-->L’agapè est l'amour du prochain, une relation univoque que l'on rapprocherait aujourd'hui de l'altruisme. Il se caractérise par sa spontanéité, ce n'est pas un acte réfléchi ou une forme de politesse mais une réelle empathie pour les autres qu'ils soient inconnus ou intimes. Dans la tradition chrétienne des pères de l'Église, ce mot est assimilé au concept de charité, bien que celui-ci soit plus proche d'une relation matérielle établie avec des personnes en souffrance. L’agapè originel ne revêt pas cette connotation morale de responsabilité devant une autorité divine.
fr-->La storgê décrit l’amour familial, comme l’amour, l'affection d’un parent pour son enfant.
fr-->D'après la revue Planète, les relations amoureuses aux États-Unis, selon leur type, s'exprimaient dans les années 1960 par trois mots : « love », le sentiment amoureux ; « sex », les rapports sexuels sans préjuger des sentiments, présents ou non ; et « fun », le simple échange de relations intersexe allant du simple flirt à des relations plus poussées, mais sans intention d'engagement ni d'une part ni de l'autre.
fr-->Les réflexions philosophiques se développent sur des vécus différents. Citons l'amour reçu des parents, l'amitié, la passion amoureuse. L'amour reçu des parents est idéalement vécu d'abord comme un donné inconditionnel, mais fusionnel ; puis de plus en plus comme responsabilisant (l'enfant reconnu dans son altérité doit fonder son propre foyer) ; pour se poursuivre, à travers des conflits plus ou moins aigus dans une nécessaire distance où l'enfant s'assume dans une relation dont il se sent responsable, qu'il peut vivre avec d'autres comme amitié. La passion amoureuse se vit d'abord comme une aliénation, elle nait de l'émotion, vise la possession. Elle peut se prolonger dans un engagement de volonté, comme don de soi dans la fidélité.
fr-->Certains philosophes ont développé le concept d'amour comme fusion. Empédocle imaginait l'amour et la haine comme les deux forces originaires de l'être. L'amour, pour lui, est le contraire de la haine qui sépare. L'idée d'unité, voire de fusion, sous-tend sa notion d'amour. Dans la même veine, Aristophane, dans le Banquet de Platon, imagine l'amour comme une aspiration à l'unité originelle. Étendu à sa dimension cosmique, l'amour ne semble plus qu'un leurre pour nous faire participer à la dynamique cosmique. Arthur Schopenhauer, inspiré par le bouddhisme, en arrive ainsi à un pessimisme métaphysique : puisque l'amour nous fait entrer dans un cycle cosmique sans cesse répété, dans un cycle de souffrances menant à une unité impersonnelle, ne vaut-il pas mieux renoncer au désir, à l'amour ? Schopenhauer avance que l'amour n'est qu'une illusion du Vouloir-Vivre (l'essence de toute chose selon lui) qui est défini comme le désir inconditionnel d'une espèce de subsister et de se perpétuer elle-même à travers la reproduction.
fr-->Socrate va au-delà du concept d'amour-fusion. Il comprend l'amour comme étant l'enfant de Pénia, le dénuement, et Poros, la ressource. Aimer, c'est désirer ce qu'on n'a pas. L'amour, à la différence du besoin, est une insatisfaction radicale : enfant de dénuement. L'amour cherche la contemplation de la beauté, et ultimement de la beauté absolue. Cet amour est aussi riche en ressources - enfant de Poros -, donc fécond, non dans la possession, mais dans la créativité, car né de la différence entre le même et l'autre, il est source d'imprévisible nouveauté.
fr-->Aristote conceptualise la différence entre eros et philia, mettant en valeur cette dernière. La philia idéale est celle où on s'unit non par intérêt ou plaisir, mais comme recherche du bien de l'autre sans rien attendre en retour. La joie de ces 'amis' vient de l'amitié elle-même. Aristote introduit dans l'idée d'amour l'idée d'opposition entre amour de soi et amour de l'autre. Cependant il résout l'opposition dans l'idée que l'amour de soi bien pensé demande de s'attacher à la « partie supérieure de l'âme », à rechercher le Bien supérieur, à vivre harmonieusement en commun, et cette harmonie qui est le bien vivre, qui est le cœur de l'être, ne peut se vivre qu'en vivant l'amour de l'autre qui fait sentir la joie de l'être à travers l'existence de l'autre. L'autre est nommé par lui « alter ego » : j'ai besoin de l'autre pour me comprendre.
fr-->Pour répondre à cette question : « l'homme est-il à la source de l'amour qu'il vit ou l'amour est-il un concept naturel qui s'impose à l'homme ? », le philosophe Baruch Spinoza, qui s'est sérieusement penché sur la question, notamment dans son Éthique, définit ainsi que : « L'amour n'est autre chose que la joie, accompagnée de l'idée d'une cause extérieure ; (...) Nous voyons également que celui qui aime s'efforce nécessairement de se rendre présent et de conserver la chose qu'il aime. » Il semble que c'est par le biais de la littérature que le thème de l'amour a été traité par les philosophes à partir de la Renaissance. Pensons à Rousseau, Goethe, Voltaire, etc. Sur le déplacement de l'interrogation sur l'agapé grec vers la littérature, nous renvoyons à Derrida.
fr-->Emmanuel Levinas a développé le thème de l'altérité notamment dans : Le Temps et l'autre, Totalité et Infini. Il porta l'éthique au rang de philosophie première, réel bouleversement dans le rationalisme occidental.
fr-->Le XXe siècle ressuscite aussi une conception hédoniste de l'amour, notamment à travers le mouvement hippie :
fr-->« Vivre d'amour et d'eau fraîche ». Ni guerre ni labeur ; uniquement l'amour. « Peace and Love » (« Paix et amour »). Plaisir de la séduction, de l'érotisme et des divertissements sexuels mêlé de pacifisme.
fr-->Sur le plan psychique, la psychanalyse considère que les premières relations parents-enfants sont déterminantes dans l'esprit d'une personne et de sa perception de l'amour. Les relations mère-fils ou père-fille, notamment, sont particulièrement marquantes. Les relations parents-enfants sont généralement déséquilibrées : le parent répond aux besoins de l'enfant. Il est dit dans ce cas que l'amour de l'enfant est captatif et celui des parents oblatif.
fr-->En grandissant l'enfant apprend à rééquilibrer ces relations. Cet apprentissage peut échouer à tel ou tel moment, et l'adulte en garder un manque de maturité (s'il n'en prend pas conscience) et une perception de l'amour plus ou moins blessée. Les relations de ses parents entre eux seraient aussi importantes dans la construction de cette idée de l'amour.
fr-->L'amour peut être perçu essentiellement comme la quête d'un manque, lorsque la notion oblative ne s'est pas développée. L'amour apporté à un individu ou un objet naîtrait par ce qu'il apporte à un individu ou qu'il serait susceptible de lui apporter. « Aimer » ne serait autre qu'une façon inconsciente d'avouer sa propre impuissance à l'autonomie pour un besoin particulier à un moment donné. Besoin d’aimer ou besoin de se sentir aimé ne serait autre qu'un besoin égoïste, qu'une attente de la personne qui pourrait combler les ‘manques’ immatériels ou matériels qu'elle ne serait pas capable de satisfaire par elle-même. Par exemple, en Occident, le besoin d'un enfant entraînerait le besoin d’une compagne ou d’un compagnon à nos côtés, besoin qui nourrit un sentiment d’amour ou de besoin d’amour pour la personne attendue pour concevoir cet enfant.
fr-->La réalité psychique du besoin d’enfant résiderait plus dans un besoin de sécurité motivé apparemment par le bien de l'enfant : le nourrir et l'accompagner vers l’âge adulte. Mais cette attitude, apparemment généreuse, sous-tendrait en fait un désir caché chez certains parents d'être accompagné vers la vieillesse. Dans ce type de situation, « aimer » ou dire « je suis amoureux(se) », serait une façon inconsciente de dire : « j’espère que la personne pour laquelle j’éprouve des sentiments amoureux m’apportera les choses que j’attends d’elle ». Tant qu'il est senti chez la personne aimée la présence des choses attendues de sa part, le sentiment perdure, mais si la personne aimée perd ou ne dispose pas d'une partie de ce que l'autre attend, le sentiment d’amour s’estompe ou s’éteint. Lorsque ce sentiment s'estompe, il n'est pas rare d’entendre : « Nos deux chemins se sont séparés » car « mes besoins ont changé », « nous n'avons pas suivi la même route », etc. À ce moment, la personne qui se sent « en danger » peut être sujette à des crises d'anxiété. La personne quittée peut y être plus ou moins indifférente ; si tel n’est pas le cas celui qui est « abandonné » aura probablement un sentiment de tristesse, de jalousie, de colère ou même de haine…
fr-->Selon l'universitaire Nicolas Favez, l'amour a longtemps été absent en psychologie du couple, à la fois pour des raisons morales et en raison de la difficulté à aborder l’objet. Isaac « Zick » Rubin (1970) est considéré comme le précurseur des recherches empiriques et psychométriques en la matière ; ses travaux s'appuient sur une théorie de l’amour compris comme « une attitude qui prédispose l’individu à penser, ressentir et agir d’une façon particulière envers un objet d’amour », vision semblable à l’attachement romantique. Plusieurs typologies ont été proposées comme celle du sociologue John Alan Lee (en) dans Les couleurs de l’amour en 1970 (déclinée en plusieurs « styles » de « Eros » à « Agape ») ou encore la théorie dite « triangulaire » (1977) du psychologue Robert Sternberg (où l’amour est constitué de trois composants : la passion, l’intimité et l’engagement, dimensions susceptibles de varier en intensité, représenté sous forme d’un triangle, et qui donne sept styles de l’« affection » à l’« amour accompli »).
fr-->Si conceptualiser l’amour au niveau psychologique est déjà difficile, le mesurer est plus compliqué encore, et la plupart des chercheurs ont renoncé devant la difficulté à trouver des critères le rendant quantifiable (Rubin, 1988). Quelques tentatives ont cependant eu lieu : en 1986, Elaine Hatfield et Susan Sprecher, respectivement psychologue et sociologue américaines, élaborent la Passionate Love Scale (PLS) (« échelle d'amour passionnel »), un test visant à mesurer le degré d'intensité de l'amour porté par un individu pour un autre ; celui-ci intègre des composants cognitifs, émotionnels et comportementaux,. Le protocole est ensuite réutilisé par de nombreux chercheurs dans les décennies suivantes,. D'autres échelles sont ensuite élaborées : la Love Attitudes Scale (« échelle d’attitudes amoureuses ») (C. Hendrick & S. Hendrick, 1990; C. Hendrick, S. Hendrick & Dicke, 1998) et la Triangular Love Scale (« échelle d'amour triangulaire ») (Sternberg, 1997).
fr-->En 1999, les universitaires Roy F. Baumeister et Ellen Bratslavsky exposent une théorie selon laquelle l'amour est la dérivée première de l'intimité mesurée dans le temps, ce qui signifie que si le sentiment amoureux est peu intense lorsque l'intimité est stable (qu'elle soit forte ou faible), il va en se renforçant dès que l'intimité va croissant,. En 2003, les chercheurs Anne Falconi et Étienne Mullet déterminent la « structure algébrique exacte » de l'amour tout au long d'une vie adulte en attribuant un facteur multiplicateur à chacune des trois grandes composantes de l'amour : 0,51 pour la passion, 0,29 pour l'intimité et 0,20 pour l'engagement,.
fr-->Selon Nicolas Favez, la principale critique concernant l'appréhension générale de l'amour en psychologie « est l’indétermination de leur objet : il n’est jamais très clair si l’on parle, avec ces styles d’amour, de la personnalité des individus – leur inclinaison à aimer d’une certaine façon, ce qui en ferait donc un trait de personnalité, ou si l’on parle de relations – le style serait une qualité émergente de la rencontre entre deux personnes. [...] Or, la question est de savoir dans quelle mesure nous avons deux systèmes séparés, l’un d’amour et l’autre qui évalue l’importance de la relation et pilote le premier, ou si l’importance que nous attribuons à une relation de dépend pas justement de l’amour ressenti ».
fr-->Zoologiquement, la vie et le comportement sexuels des êtres humains présentent de nombreux points communs avec ceux des primates, et plus généralement avec l'ensemble des mammifères. L'observation de l'espèce la plus proche de l'Homo sapiens, le chimpanzé nain du Congo ou bonobo (Pan paniscus), ainsi que celle des autres grands singes, suggère que l'amour chez l'homme ne serait qu'une forme culturellement complexifiée d'un phénomène existant déjà chez ces animaux.
fr-->Physiologiquement, le coït tel qu'il est observé chez l'Homo sapiens ne diffère guère de l'accouplement chez les grands singes. En revanche, la séquence amoureuse, des premières approches, de la séduction jusqu'à l'accouplement, semble avoir évolué parallèlement à l'hypertrophie du cortex cérébral dont a été dotée notre espèce au cours de son évolution récente. Les aptitudes à l'idéation, l'imagination, l'anticipation et à la stratégie qui en résultent ont complexifié le processus à l'extrême.
fr-->L'attachement durable, la formation de couples relativement stables s'observe également chez ces animaux, mais sans atteindre la diversité des comportements individuels, la durée et le rôle fondamental de l'imaginaire constatés dans la vie amoureuse humaine. Un autre facteur qui distingue l'humain des singes, avec d'énormes conséquences, est la disponibilité quasi constante de la femelle humaine à l'accouplement, ce qui n'existe pas chez les autres mammifères.
fr-->Les zoologues se sont en outre intéressés à l'avantage concurrentiel, du point de vue de l'espèce, que donne l'amour tel qu'il se manifeste chez les êtres humains. Il apparaîtrait comme nécessaire à la sécurisation du couple durant la période d'extrême vulnérabilité des jeunes, elle-même suivie de la phase de développement de l'intelligence d'un adulte, moments qui, rapportés à leurs équivalents chez les espèces proches, sont extrêmement longs.
fr-->En outre, les comportements sexuels se manifestent de manière extrêmement variable chez les animaux. D'un point de vue évolutif, la grande variété des comportements amoureux influencerait la diversité des espèces.
fr-->Les études animales de l’attachement ont montré que les différents types d’attachement (filial, romantique, fraternel, amical, pour un animal, un habitat, un milieu ou pour un objet) ont des bases neurobiologiques en partie communes. Chez l’humain, l’attachement « romantique » met en jeu globalement les mêmes régions cérébrales, ainsi que certaines structures impliquées dans les récompenses. L’attachement « romantique » dépendrait, au moins en partie, du contexte socioculturel. En effet, il est observé que dans les sociétés où l’activité érotique se déroule simplement et quotidiennement, l’attachement romantique est moins marqué et plus « apaisé » que dans les passions et les extases sentimentales de l’amoureux occidental, « qui soupire comme une fournaise » pour un impossible idéal romantique. Plusieurs auteurs ont souligné la ressemblance entre certains aspects de la passion amoureuse (altération de l’état mental, exaltation de l’humeur, pensées intrusives de l’objet aimé…) et certains troubles psychiques (observés par exemple dans les troubles bipolaires et obsessionnels-compulsifs). En schématisant, il semblerait que la mise en jeu du système des récompenses, facteur primordial de la sexualité humaine,, induise une « dépendance » à l’objet « aimé » qui conduirait à des états de « manque » lorsque cet objet est inaccessible. Ces états psychiques intenses provoqués par les passions amoureuses sont à l'origine, non seulement d'accomplissements remarquables dans les arts, la poésie et la littérature, mais également de bouleversements individuels (tentatives de suicide, crimes passionnels…) ou sociaux (selon la légende, la guerre de Troie fut provoqué par l'enlèvement d'Hélène par le prince Pâris, subjugué par sa beauté extraordinaire).
fr-->L’anthropologue Helen Fisher assimile la puissance de ce sentiment à une addiction proche de la cocaïno-dépendance.
fr-->Quant à l'amour maternel, chez les animaux, une intervention dans un processus naturel comme l'accouchement perturbe l'attachement de la femelle envers son petit. Ainsi, « des brebis parturientes ayant subi une anesthésie péridurale ne manifestent pas de comportement maternel ».
fr-->Dans son dernier ouvrage, Le Premier Amour (Plon, 1999), les enfants sont de grands passionnés et savent très tôt ce qu'aimer veut dire, on aime à trois ans comme on aimera toute sa vie', explique le psychosociologue Francesco Alberoni.
fr-->Le lien originel serait la première histoire d’amour selon les chercheurs, une continuation de quête à toutes les histoires amoureuses convoitées. L’attachement sexuel présenterait dès la naissance une activité neurophysiologique qui se maintiendrait dans l'enfance pour déborder physiquement sur l’âge adulte avec l’afflux d’hormones provoquant des réponses physiologiques à l'adolescence. Jean-Pol Tassin, neurobiologiste au Collège de France, indique que les histoires d'amour sont des éléments émotionnels dans le processus cérébral qui sont un prolongement du lien maternel. « Dès la naissance, un rapport à la mère fondé sur la recherche de plaisirs sensoriels se crée, explique-t-il. Avec ce premier rapport hédoniste, l'enfant au cours de son développement se bâtit ce que l'on peut appeler un « bassin attracteur » : il intègre petit à petit ses satisfactions premières et va passer sa vie à rechercher chez les autres des stimuli analogues. » 
fr-->La famille est un lieu riche en relations amoureuses : amour conjugal, amour maternel, et de manière plus générale, parental, amour filial, fratrie.
fr-->L'importance de l'affection des membres d'une même famille entre eux est illustrée par l'émotion vécue dans les grands évènements tels qu'une naissance, un mariage, un succès, une épreuve, un accident, un décès.
fr-->L'amour ne diffère pas fondamentalement dans les diverses cultures humaines, les parades de séduction restant à la base les mêmes en Afrique, en Orient, en Europe ou en Amérique du Nord[réf. nécessaire]. C'est plutôt l'attitude à l'égard du désir féminin, dont la répression est fréquente dans beaucoup de sociétés (voir aussi Comportement et langage), qui change de forme extérieure. Il semble qu'un abandon de soi permet la délivrance ou l'expression d'un aboutissement à autrui.
fr-->Le comportement sexuel varie fort peu suivant les diverses sociétés humaines. Les modes de séduction, de contacts, les parades et les expressions faciales ne présentent que des différences mineures et très extérieures.[réf. nécessaire] L'Europe n'a plus le monopole de la représentation massifiée du comportement amoureux ; pourtant, les deux grandes industries cinématographiques du monde, occidentale et indienne[réf. nécessaire], montrent de manière saisissante le caractère uniforme des représentations collectives de la sexualité dans des cultures différentes, a fortiori sachant que ces deux cinémas ont chacun une aire d'influence qui va bien au-delà de leurs sphères géographiques propres. Les films indiens sont depuis longtemps projetés dans tous les cinémas du Moyen-Orient et du monde arabe, tandis que le cinéma occidental a depuis longtemps fait la conquête du Japon et de la zone d'influence chinoise.[réf. nécessaire]
fr-->Néanmoins, certains détails comportementaux sont culturellement acquis. Le baiser avec la langue, par exemple, qui semble naturel en Occident, en Chine, dans le monde arabe, en Inde, était probablement inconnu en Afrique subsaharienne avant l'arrivée des Européens[réf. nécessaire]. Dans Ma vie secrète, un anonyme licencieux de l'époque victorienne rapporte qu'il a dû enseigner cette pratique, qui n'allait pas de soi. Il s'agirait donc d'un trait culturel, mineur, mais réel.
fr-->L'éthnolinguistique, l'anthropologie linguistique et les études en traduction mettent en question la démarche anthropologique qui consiste à analyser le rapport entre les êtres humains et l'amour dans diverses langues-cultures. L'éthnolinguistique de Underhill (2012) montre par exemple que l'amour est représenté en termes métaphoriques, et que les cadres et les configurations métaphoriques diffèrent en anglais, français et tchèque. Mais si on va au-delà de la langue et on entre dans le discours, on ne peut maintenir le modèle d'un individu qui incarne sa culture et sa langue. On constate que les individus adoptent, adaptent et résistent les cadres culturels qu'ils trouvent dans la langue. L'anthropologie qui focalise sur les études multilingues montre que la langue n'est que le modèle qui est entretenu par les discours et par les « stratégies discursives ». L'amour se négocie en langage. Et souvent les locuteurs résistent ou rejettent les métaphores conceptuelles selon lesquelles l'amour serait « fusion », le « centre » ou le « but » de la vie. L'humour ne cesse d'innover à partir de paradigmes traditionnels. La vulgarité aussi (voir Underhill 2012).
fr-->L'homosexualité est un comportement attesté depuis la plus haute Antiquité et fort bien documenté. D'un point de vue psychologique, l'amour entre homosexuels ne diffère pas significativement de l'amour hétérosexuel.
fr-->Internet a modifié quelque peu les relations amoureuses dans le monde en facilitant les contacts à distance. De nombreux couples issus de continents différents se sont formés grâce à ce nouveau média.[réf. nécessaire]
fr-->Paradoxalement, l'acte le plus naturel du monde (la reproduction) tout comme certaines fonctions corporelles (la défécation) sont accompagnés chez les êtres humains d'interdits sociaux visibles au niveau du langage et du comportement. Il existe dans toutes les sociétés humaines des tabous relatifs à ces fonctions. Par exemple l'homme est la seule créature[réf. nécessaire] qui se réunit en groupe pour manger mais, dans certaines cultures, s'isole pour déféquer. De même, l'acte sexuel se fait de préférence dans l'isolement (l'amour en groupe est considéré comme déviant). Le langage est lui-même empreint de ces valeurs morales qui distinguent ce qui est « propre » de ce qui est « sale ». La plupart des religions ont considéré comme nuisible pour la vie de l'individu le fait de vouloir satisfaire toutes les pulsions sans critères de limite (voir libertinage, célibat, abstinence) ou au contraire pour en faire le centre de leur philosophie dans certaines sectes (le gourou s'adjuge toutes les femmes du groupe). Le langage distingue ainsi dans toutes les langues du monde plusieurs niveaux pour désigner la copulation : poétique (union), vulgaire (baiser et une infinité d'autres termes), médical-scientifique (coït), etc. Quelques exemples d'euphémismes évitent d'être trop explicite comme faire l'amour ou coucher avec quelqu'un.
fr-->Le choix du partenaire résulte en fin de compte d'un équilibre subtil entre l'attirance consciente ou culturelle (goûts ou passions communs, niveau de langage, richesse, comportement social, etc.) et l'attirance inconsciente ou naturelle (physique, odeur, sentiment de sécurité, etc.) Il est naturel d'exprimer métaphysiquement ses envies, désirs et besoins.
fr-->De toute époque, l'amour, comme « désir », a inspiré les artistes de toutes les disciplines artistiques. C'est un thème récurrent et majeur avec le temps ; conséquences de la naissance, de la vie et la mort.
fr-->L'amour a toujours été un thème de prédilection dans l'histoire de la peinture et de la sculpture, par la représentation de situations amoureuses ou par la symbolique ou l'allégorie, faisant intervenir des personnages mythologiques.
fr-->Certains thèmes ou personnages mythologiques ou historiques reviennent :
fr-->Éros (ou Cupidon), dieu des amours profanes, est souvent représenté dans des scènes comme sujet principal, ou comme personnage secondaire pour évoquer la présence symbolique de l'amour. Enfant ou adolescent espiègle et capricieux, ailé et portant un arc avec lequel il tire des flèches d'or dans les cœurs humains, ce qui leur apportent amour et désir d'amour. Les scènes les plus représentées sont : l'amour d'Éros pour Psyché, Éros l'enfant turbulent désarmé par sa mère Aphrodite, la victoire de l'amour sur les œuvres humaines (voir la célèbre version du Caravage) ou la lutte entre l'amour profane et l'amour sacré.
fr-->Aphrodite (ou Vénus), déesse de l'amour, mère de Éros/Cupidon, inspire souvent les peintres, notamment pour l'épisode de sa naissance. Elle apparaît au monde déjà adulte, nue et sortant de la mer : les versions de Botticelli (cf. La naissance de Vénus), Cabanel, Fantin-Latour ou Bouguereau comptent parmi les plus célèbres.
fr-->La vie amoureuse tumultueuse de Zeus/Jupiter a également fait l'objet de nombreuses représentations : l'enlèvement de Léda, d'Europe ou de Ganymède sont parmi les thèmes les plus souvent traités.
fr-->Les grandes histoires d'amour de l'histoire ou de la littérature comme Tristan et Yseult, Roméo et Juliette, Ulysse et Pénélope et bien d'autres ont été traitées en peinture, surtout dans les périodes romantiques (préraphaélisme, romantisme , etc.).
fr-->Par ailleurs, nombre de scènes amoureuses de la vie quotidienne des hommes ont été représentées, depuis la cour faite à l'être aimé au drame amoureux, en passant par le baiser langoureux ou le libertinage. Un exemple est le tableau de Jean-Honoré Fragonard nommé le Verrou.
fr-->L'art poétique et le roman sont, avec la chanson, quelques-uns des moyens de prédilection de l'expression verbale de l'amour. À travers les âges, la littérature a reflété des tendances de l'amour, des divinités mythologiques à l'amour réaliste de notre époque.
fr-->Le français présente une curiosité grammaticale : le mot amour est ordinairement au masculin au singulier, mais souvent au féminin au pluriel (« Un amour mort » / « Des amours mortes »), mais il peut également être au féminin au singulier (« La belle amour, la vraie amour »).
fr-->Une des principales lois du judaïsme dicte d'aimer l’Éternel « de tout son cœur, de toute son âme et de toutes ses forces ». Elle est régulièrement citée par les pratiquants lors du Chema Israël (« écoute Israël »), prière quotidienne.
fr-->Un autre commandement concernant l'amour est « tu aimeras ton prochain comme toi-même ». Le judaïsme distingue trois types d'amour : physique, charitable et spirituel. L'amour physique est manifesté dans le récit de la Création où Eve naît à partir d'une côte d'Adam.
fr-->Selon la conférencière Gila Manolson, l'amour dans le judaïsme est avant tout spirituel (le partage des valeurs et la bonté à déceler chez les autres est ce qui importe le plus). C'est également un amour qui se démontre par des actes, ainsi que l'écrit Jill Murray : « L'amour est un comportement. » Ce comportement implique la Tsedaka, charité pratiquée par les juifs. D'après l'essai sur la Bonté du Rav Eliashou Dessler[réf. incomplète], « donner nous conduit à aimer. » La Tsedaka est donc une cause de l'amour, et non pas une conséquence. Ainsi, se comporter de manière juste (notamment en respectant les mitzvot et les lois) permet de manifester son amour envers Dieu et son prochain.
fr-->Le christianisme « se définit comme religion du Verbe incarné et de l'amour révélé ».
fr-->La révélation chrétienne tient en ceci : « Dieu est Amour » et rien d'autre(1Jn4, 8.16). Cet énoncé constitue le cœur du discours chrétien sur Dieu : « Dieu interprété comme amour ; en cela consiste l'idée chrétienne »
fr-->Selon Laurent Gagnebin, « dans les religions en général, [Dieu] commence avant tout par être compris comme un Dieu terrifiant, redoutable, très éloigné du Dieu d'amour révélé par Jésus-Christ et qui caractérise aujourd'hui encore tout le christianisme. »
fr-->L'amour du prochain est la réponse à cet amour reçu :
fr-->« Je vous donne un commandement nouveau : aimez-vous les uns les autres ; comme je vous ai aimés, vous aussi, aimez-vous les uns les autres. À ceci tous connaîtront que vous êtes mes disciples, si vous avez de l'amour les uns pour les autres. »
fr-->— Jn 13, 34-35
fr-->Lorsqu'un Juif demande à Jésus : qui est mon prochain ? Jésus, par la parabole du bon Samaritain, signifie que le prochain est aussi l'étranger, l'ennemi, sans considération de religion. (Cfr Luc 10, 29-37). Ailleurs Jésus appelle à l'amour des ennemis : « Aimez vos ennemis et faites du bien à ceux qui vous haïssent. Bénissez ceux qui vous maudissent, priez pour ceux qui vous diffament. » (Luc 6, 27-28).
fr-->Le christianisme se différencie d'autres religions par l'abandon des lois et règles : seul le commandement de l'amour est sacré, est volonté de Dieu. Tout le reste est rendu relatif à ce seul commandement. L'évangile selon Matthieu, notamment, l'exprime nettement lorsqu'un docteur de la Loi s'adresse au Christ :
fr-->« Et l'un d'eux, docteur de la loi, lui demanda pour l'embarrasser :
fr-->« Maître, quel est le plus grand commandement de la Loi ? »
fr-->Il lui dit : « Tu aimeras le Seigneur ton Dieu de tout ton cœur, de toute ton âme et de tout ton esprit.
fr-->C'est là le plus grand et le premier commandement.
fr-->Un second lui est égal : tu aimeras ton proche comme toi-même.
fr-->En ces deux commandements tient toute la Loi, et les Prophètes. » »
fr-->— Mt 22, 35, 40
fr-->La recherche de l'amour du prochain, inextricablement liée à l'amour de Dieu, est le fondement de la relation humaine dans la Bible. Le rôle de l'Église et des Écritures est d'ouvrir le cœur des êtres humains (leurs conscience) pour qu'il puisse vivre cet amour toujours plus profondément.
fr-->Pour certains[Qui ?], l'amour du prochain se définit comme une force intérieure qui pousse un être humain à rechercher la paix et à la partager avec les autres. Le désir d'amour se traduit par celui d'être avec l'autre ou les autres, celui d'accepter de recevoir et de donner, celui de dialoguer, de vivre avec, de comprendre, d'accompagner, etc.
fr-->Selon saint Paul : « Si je n’ai pas d’amour je ne suis rien. L'amour est patient, il est plein de bonté; l'amour n'est point envieux, il ne se vante point, il ne s'enfle pas d'orgueil. Il ne fait rien de malhonnête. Il ne cherche point son intérêt, il ne s'irrite point, il ne soupçonne point le mal. Il ne se réjouit point de l'injustice, mais il se réjouit de la vérité. Il excuse tout, il croit tout, il espère tout, il supporte tout. L'amour ne meurt jamais. »
fr-->L'amour dont parle le christianisme se nomme parfois charité (du latin caritas), terme qui le distingue de l'amour érotique ou de l'amitié, et qui comporte, dans son sens religieux initial, une dimension transcendante. Il ne dépend pas du sentiment, mais de la volonté en lien avec l'intelligence. Benoît XVI proclame : « Ce n'est que dans la vérité que l'amour resplendit et qu'il peut être vécu avec authenticité. (...) Dépourvu de vérité, l'amour bascule dans le sentimentalisme. (...) Il est alors la proie des émotions et de l'opinion contingente des êtres humains ; il devient un terme galvaudé et déformé jusqu'à signifier son contraire. La vérité libère l'amour des étroitesses de l'émotivité qui le prive de contenus relationnels et sociaux, et d'un fidéisme qui le prive d'un souffle humain et universel. » (La charité a parfois pris le sens d'une sorte de pitié paternaliste : ce sens est très loin du sens de l’Évangile.)
fr-->Lanza del Vasto précise : « La Charité est un amour conscient partant de la connaissance de soi et de la reconnaissance de soi en autrui. (...) C'est un amour « théologal », c'est-à-dire « découlant de la connaissance de Dieu ». C'est la découverte dans l'âme de tout homme de "l'image et ressemblance de Dieu"(cfr Genèse 1, 26) déposées en elle comme en nous-mêmes ». « Apprends à aimer non parce que ton cœur incontinent déborde, mais pour répondre au commandement de Dieu. Apprends la charité virile qui possède des paroles sévères pour ceux qui t'aiment, sereines pour ceux qui te combattent, chaudes pour ceux qui faiblissent, fortes pour ceux qui souffrent, claires pour les aveugles, écrasantes pour les orgueilleux, un seau d'eau et un bâton pour ceux qui dorment. L'amour qui demande et qui pleure, tue-le ; l'amour qui étreint et qui force, tue-le. Apprends l'amour qui n'attend rien du monde mais rayonne de par sa vertu propre, l'amour qui insuffle force à la personne aimée, et l'amène à la délivrance. »
fr-->Le pape François a rappelé ce commandement en conclusion de son message pour la Journée mondiale de la paix 2014, en soulignant que l'amour se traduit par la fraternité, qui est « fondement et route pour la paix », qui est avec la liberté et l'égalité, l'une des trois vertus républicaines fondatrices de la conception contemporaine des droits de l'homme, comme l'a souligné Jean-Paul II dans une homélie lors de son premier voyage en France en 1980.
fr-->L'étude de l’Évangile selon Marc amène Benoit et Ariane Thiran à préciser ce qu'est l'amour vécu-enseigné par Jésus-Christ. L'amour, ils le définissent à partir du regard (intérieur) posé sur l'autre et soi-même, regard qui cesse d'être binaire et en opposition, par exemple lorsque je me pose comme le bon, le pur, le méritant face à "l'autre" qui ne l'est pas. L'amour exige d'exister, de s'affirmer, mais sans écraser, d'interpeller l'autre mais en partant du respect le plus grand pour l'autre et en étant prêt à souffrir à l'instar du Maître.
fr-->Dieu (en arabe Allah) est dans l'islam amour ; « Dieu se qualifie dans le Coran de « Miséricordieux par essence » (Rahmân en arabe) et de « Miséricordieux d'une façon existentielle et efficiente" (Rahîm en arabe): 329 occurrences; Il est "le plus Miséricordieux des miséricordieux »; [Les mots] Rahmân et Rahîm dérivent de la racine RHM qui renvoie à la matrice de la mère: rahim. Dieu est la matrice de l'univers, et aime Ses créatures d'un amour matriciel ». « Dieu est plein de bonté et de compassion pour les hommes ».
fr-->L'amour de Dieu est le point de départ et le cœur du message de Mahomet; ce à quoi il a appelé les hommes: « Si vous aimez Dieu réellement, suivez-moi et Dieu vous aimera et vous pardonnera vos péchés. Dieu est indulgent et miséricordieux »; « Le Coran est... une preuve de la miséricorde de Dieu envers ceux qui ont la foi »; « Il comblera d'amour ceux qui croient et pratiquent les bonnes œuvres ».
fr-->« L'islam est la religion de la « rah mah », [un mot arabe] qu'on rendrait par charité, amour, clémence, bienveillance et générosité dans tous les sens de ce dernier mot ; c'est cette « rah mah » qui fonde l'éthique islamique ».
fr-->D'après Anas Ibn Malik, le Prophète a dit: « Aucun de vous ne sera croyant jusqu'à ce qu'il aime pour son frère  ce qu'il aime pour lui-même ». ce hadith montre clairement que chaque musulman doit aimer pour les autres ce qu'il aime pour sa propre personne, ceci formera une société pleine de confiance, entraide, amour et solidarité, et écartera le ressentiment, l'inimitié et la jalousie.
fr-->La relation entre couple est fondée sur l'amour, Ibn Hibbân a rapporté d’après Abôu hourayrah, que le Messager d'Allâh a dit :« Les croyants qui ont la foi la plus complète sont ceux qui ont le meilleur comportement, et parmi les meilleurs d’entre vous, il y a ceux qui sont les meilleurs envers leurs épouses ». Le Prophète recommande aux croyants d'être doux, d'agir avec tendresse et miséricorde, bienfaisance, sourire, modestie et pardon, et ne pas répondre au mal par le mal (sources?). Ne pas charger l'épouse de choses qu’elle ne peut pas supporter, être à ses côtés lors des difficultés, pour gagner grâce à tout cela son amour. Cependant il est déclare en surate 2 ;223 « Vos femmes sont pour vous comme un champ de culture ou de labour ( harth ); allez donc à vos champs comme vous l’entendez (faatou harthoukoum ana chiitoum)».
fr-->Les mystiques musulmans, appelés soufis, ont accordé beaucoup d'importance à célébrer l'amour de Dieu ; la secte des «  derviches tourneurs » avait la particularité de le faire par la danse.
fr-->Dans les bouddhismes Mahayana et Vajrayana (bouddhismes vietnamiens, chan, zen, lamaïsme), l'Amour est l'une des quatre qualités d'être que le pratiquant doit développer, l'un des « Quatre Infinis » ou « Quatre Incommensurables » : l'amour, la compassion, la joie et l'équanimité. Les tibétains définissent l'amour comme un souhait du bonheur de l'autre ; la compassion, comme un souhait de cessation de la souffrance de l'autre ; la joie, comme une participation à son bonheur ; l'équanimité comme le fait d'être attentif de façon semblable à tout être et toute chose sans établir un attachement privilégié. Tout pratiquant du bouddhisme Mahayana doit souhaiter la « bodhicitta » - « l'esprit d'éveil » - : souhaiter obtenir l'éveil ou les qualités spirituelles pour le bien des êtres, et ultimement, libérer définitivement les souffrances humaines. Karuna (sansk.), est traduit par « compassion » en français et « loving-kindness » en anglais, une activité d'attention aimante envers l'autre. Au Tibet, la compassion est décrite comme l'attitude de la mère attentive face à ses enfants.
fr-->Dans le bouddhisme Mahayana, d'une façon générale, la compassion, ou « amour-tendresse » est à développer conjointement à la sagesse (compréhension de la nature réelle, objective des phénomènes, philosophie du non-soi, etc.) La sagesse permet de s'affranchir de l'idée du soi, donc de toute tendance égotique ou narcissique. En cela, elle participe à l'émergence d'une « compassion infinie ». De même, la sagesse exige une grande compassion pour être actualisée : l'extinction de l'illusion du soi, pour les bouddhistes, exige une infinie dévotion, une immense abnégation. Aussi, pour les bouddhistes du Tibet, sagesse et compassion (ou « amour-tendresse ») se développent l'un l'autre jusqu'à conduire le pratiquant dans une « Terre pure » de bodhisattva - c'est-à-dire jusqu'à l'actualisation du potentiel humain d'amour, de joie, de compassion et d'équanimité.
fr-->Dans le bouddhisme ancien, selon l'enseignement du Bouddha, cette vision de l'amour n'apparaît pas. Le Bouddha insiste surtout sur le détachement qui conduit à la suppression du « désir » (Taṇhā), et donc au bonheur durable (cessation de la souffrance, nirvana). Ce n'est qu'entre les Ier et IVe siècles apr. J.-C. qu’émergera le bouddhisme Mahayana pour lequel l’action de compassion et d’amour envers l’autre prime sur l’ascèse et la méditation.
fr-->Pour les bouddhismes issus des développements du Mahayana et du Vajrayana, amour, joie et compassion ne sont pas des émotions mais de véritables qualités d'êtres. Les émotions telles la colère, la jalousie, la peur, l'avidité, l'orgueil, passion, ne sauraient durer, elles sont passagères et proviennent de l'attachement et du désir. Au contraire, l'amour, la joie et la compassion peuvent se développer infiniment et sans être nécessairement dépendantes d'un objet ou de la présence d'un être. Le pratiquant peut les porter en lui, les développer infiniment et au-delà de tout attachement.
fr-->Selon Vivekananda, maître spirituel de l'hindouisme, l'amour de Dieu (bhakti en sanskrit) est le véritable amour, non égoïste : « Nous ne pourrons concevoir une jouissance plus haute que l’amour, mais ce mot amour a différentes significations. Il ne signifie pas l’amour égoïste qui est courant dans le monde ; (...) l’amour qui est parfaitement sans égoïsme est le seul amour, et c’est celui de Dieu. Il est très difficile à atteindre. Nous passons à travers toutes ces amours différentes, amour des enfants, du père, de la mère , etc.. Nous développons lentement notre faculté d’amour, mais dans la majorité des cas, nous n’apprenons rien, nous nous enchaînons à un stade, à une personne. »
fr-->Platon, Le Banquet et Phèdre
fr-->Lucrèce, De la nature des choses
fr-->Thomas d'Aquin, Somme théologique (Iae IIae, qu. 20)
fr-->Ibn Arabi, Les Illuminations de La Mecque (ch. 178)
fr-->Marsile Ficin, Commentaire du Banquet de Platon. De l'amour
fr-->Jean Pic de la Mirandole, Commentaire sur une chanson d'amour de Jérôme Benivieni
fr-->Tullia d'Aragon, De l'Infinité d'amour
fr-->Marquis de Sade, La Philosophie dans le boudoir
fr-->Arthur Schopenhauer, Le Monde comme Volonté et comme Représentation (chap. XLIV, Métaphysique de l'amour)
fr-->Søren Kierkegaard, Ou bien... ou bien et La Reprise
fr-->Friedrich Nietzsche, Gai savoir, §14
fr-->Georges Bataille, L'Érotisme et Les Larmes d'Éros
fr-->Emmanuel Levinas, Totalité et Infini
fr-->Roland Barthes, Fragments d'un discours amoureux
fr-->Jean-Luc Marion, Le Phénomène érotique
fr-->Marc-Alain Ouaknin, Méditations érotiques
fr-->Vincent Cespedes, Je t'aime. Une autre politique de l'amour, Flammarion, 2003.
fr-->Jean-Luc Nancy, Je t'aime, un peu, beaucoup, passionnément..., Bayard Centurion, 2008.
fr-->Dominique Sels, Les Mots de l'amour arrivent d'Athènes, vocabulaire de l'amour dans Le Banquet de Platon, suivi du Portrait de Socrate, étude pour le plaisir, éditions de la Chambre au Loup, 2008.
fr-->F. Alberoni, Le Choc amoureux, trad. fr. Ramsay, 1981 ; L'érotisme, trad. fr. Ramsay, 1986 ; Le vol nuptial, trad. fr. Plon, 1994 ; Je t'aime, tout sur la passion amoureuse, trad. fr. Plon, 1997.
fr-->Élisabeth Badinter, L'amour en plus : histoire de l'amour maternel (XVIIe-XXe siècle), Flammarion, 1980, (ISBN 2 08 081100 2).
fr-->Z. Bauman, L'amour liquide. De la fragilité des liens entre les hommes, Le Rouergue, 2004.
fr-->Denis de Rougemont, L'amour et l'Occident, Paris, Plon, 1939, édition remaniée 1956, édition définitive 1972.
fr-->J. Duvignaud, La genèse des passions dans la vie sociale, PUF, 1990.
fr-->M. Foucault, Histoire de la sexualité, trois tomes (La volonté de savoir ; L'usage des plaisirs ; Le souci de soi ), Gallimard, 1976-1984.
fr-->Benoît XVI Deus caritas est, 2005.
fr-->Mots grecs pour dire amour
fr-->Troubadour | Tantrisme
fr-->Baiser | Désir | Amitié | Haine | Amour libre | Amour-propre | Tendresse | Coup de foudre | Compassion | Âme sœur
fr-->Relation amoureuse | Soirée câlin | rapport sexuel | homosexualité
fr-->Couple (droit et sociologie)
fr-->Fleuve Amour
fr-->Faites l'amour, pas la guerre
fr-->Charité
fr-->L'Université de Berlin, la plus importante base de données sur la sexualité humaine (Documents en français / Accueil principal)
fr-->La biologie à la conquête de l'amour, sur le site du CNRS
fr-->« Plus d'amour ? », débat télévisé sur France Ô, 11-02-2010
fr--> Portail de la psychologie
fr--> Portail de la philosophie
fr--> Portail de la sexualité et de la sexologie
es-->El amor es un concepto universal relativo a la afinidad entre seres, definido de diversas formas según las diferentes ideologías y puntos de vista (artístico, científico, filosófico, religioso). De manera habitual, y fundamentalmente en Occidente, se interpreta como un sentimiento relacionado con el afecto y el apego, y resultante y productor de una serie de actitudes, emociones y experiencias. En el contexto filosófico, el amor es una virtud que representa todo el afecto, la bondad y la compasión del ser humano. También puede describirse como acciones dirigidas hacia otros y basadas en la compasión, o bien como acciones dirigidas hacia otros (o hacia uno mismo) y basadas en el afecto.[1]​
es-->En español, la palabra amor (del latín, amor, -ōris) abarca una gran cantidad de sentimientos diferentes, desde el deseo pasional y de intimidad del amor romántico hasta la proximidad emocional asexual del amor familiar y el amor platónico,[2]​ y hasta la profunda devoción o unidad del amor religioso.[3]​ En este último terreno, trasciende del sentimiento y pasa a considerarse la manifestación de un estado del alma o de la mente, identificada en algunas religiones con Dios mismo o con la fuerza que mantiene unido el universo.
es-->Las emociones asociadas al amor pueden ser extremadamente poderosas, llegando con frecuencia a ser irresistibles. El amor en sus diversas formas actúa como importante facilitador de las relaciones interpersonales y, debido a su importancia psicológica central, es uno de los temas más frecuentes en las artes creativas (cine, literatura, música).
es-->Desde el punto de vista de la ciencia, lo que conocemos como amor parece ser un estado evolucionado del primitivo instinto de supervivencia, que mantenía a los seres humanos unidos y heroicos ante las amenazas y facilitaba la continuación de la especie mediante la reproducción.[4]​
es-->La diversidad de usos y significados y la complejidad de los sentimientos que abarca hacen que el amor sea especialmente difícil de definir de un modo consistente, aunque, básicamente, el amor es interpretado de dos formas: bajo una concepción altruista, basada en la compasión y la colaboración, y bajo otra egoísta, basada en el interés individual y la rivalidad. El egoísmo suele estar relacionado con el cuerpo y el mundo material; el altruismo, con el alma y el mundo espiritual. Ambos son, según la ciencia actual, expresiones de procesos cerebrales que la evolución proporcionó al ser humano; la idea del alma, o de algo parecido al alma, probablemente apareció hace entre un millón y varios cientos de miles de años.[5]​
es-->A menudo, sucede que individuos, grupos humanos o empresas disfrazan su comportamiento egoísta de altruismo; es lo que conocemos como hipocresía, y encontramos numerosos ejemplos de dicho comportamiento en la publicidad. Recíprocamente, también puede ocurrir que, en un ambiente egoísta, un comportamiento altruista se disfrace de egoísmo: Oskar Schindler proporcionó un buen ejemplo.
es-->A lo largo de la historia se han expresado, incluso en culturas sin ningún contacto conocido entre ellas, conceptos que, con algunas variaciones, incluyen la dualidad esencial del ser humano: lo femenino y lo masculino, el bien y el mal, el yin y el yang, el ápeiron de Anaximandro.
es-->Los seres humanos podemos desarrollar en esencia dos tipos de actitudes: bajo una de ellas somos altruistas y colaboradores, y bajo la otra somos egoístas y competidores. Existen personas totalmente polarizadas hacia una de las dos actitudes por voluntad propia; por ejemplo, los monjes budistas están totalmente volcados hacia el altruismo, y los practicantes del objetivismo, hacia el egoísmo. Y también existen personas que combinan ambas formas de ser, comportándose, unas veces, de forma altruista y colaboradora, otras, de forma egoísta y competitiva, y otras, de forma parcialmente altruista y competitiva. En algunas partes del mundo predomina el altruismo (Tíbet), de modo que el egoísmo se ve en general como algo negativo. Y existen grupos humanos donde sucede lo contrario. Todas las guerras de la historia nacieron del egoísmo por parte de, al menos, uno de los dos bandos; todas las situaciones conflictivas del ser humano proceden del egoísmo.
es-->Richard Dawkins interpreta ambas actitudes como las expresiones del instinto de conservación del individuo (egoísmo) y de la especie (altruismo). Explica que, según una teoría aceptada por algunos biólogos, heredamos los genes responsables de tales actitudes de especies antecesoras, y que, antes de nuestra llegada, la evolución biológica estuvo probablemente controlada por un mecanismo denominado «selección de grupos»; en virtud de este mecanismo, los grupos de individuos en los que hubiese más miembros dispuestos a sacrificar su vida por el resto tendrían mayor probabilidad de sobrevivir que los que estaban compuestos por individuos egoístas; esto daría como resultado que el mundo terminase poblado por individuos altruistas. Es una teoría que, aunque proporciona una explicación para el hecho de que actualmente el altruismo predomine en el mundo, genera gran controversia en el mundo científico por contradecir directamente la teoría darwinista; por ello, la explicación personal del autor acerca de la supervivencia del altruismo en el marco darwinista del egoísmo individual es que la unidad de supervivencia no es el individuo, sino el gen; es decir, bajo este punto de vista, los seres humanos y los grupos de seres humanos somos «máquinas de supervivencia» «creadas» por los genes en su propio beneficio.[6]​
es-->En cualquier caso, argumenta Dawkins, por el hecho de ser la primera especie racional, también somos la primera especie en la historia de la evolución capaz de elegir entre ambos tipos de comportamiento de forma voluntaria, actuando por lo tanto de forma «independiente» a nuestra propia programación genética.[6]​
es-->La evolución parece producirse mediante procesos solapados entre sí y progresivamente refinados. A un nivel inmediato, funciona mediante un simple, gigantesco e irracional proceso de ensayo y error; los éxitos de determinado estado de organización facilitan su continuación. No obstante, a medida que la organización se va desarrollando cada vez más, aparecen de forma espontánea métodos de predicción estratégica, que eligen caminos indirectos que, a corto plazo, incluso pueden parecer un error, pero que, considerados en conjunto, constituyen un acierto; este tipo de «conductas» han podido observarse en modelos virtuales de evolución programados en una computadora; la conducta agresiva y egoísta constituye un primer nivel de superorganización, en virtud de la cual el individuo «comprende» que para su supervivencia debe «atacar» a sus rivales antes de acudir directamente a la recompensa, y la conducta altruista es un segundo nivel que surge en el momento en que los individuos desarrollan la capacidad de comunicarse entre sí; en modelos computacionales se ha observado el desarrollo completamente espontáneo de combinaciones de ambos mecanismos, de tal modo que un individuo se comunica con otros varios y «miente» al resto en beneficio del grupo. El egoísmo, de este modo, aparece desde la perspectiva del grupo como un comportamiento táctico, y el altruismo como un comportamiento estratégico.
es-->La inteligencia se constituye como un nivel adicional de superorganización que permite el análisis de la situación global y la predicción del mejor camino a seguir mediante la sustitución en buena medida del método físico del ensayo y error por un proceso paralelo y «virtual», también sujeto a evolución, que se desarrolla íntegramente en el cerebro de los individuos y que se transmite de forma igualmente «virtual» a las generaciones siguientes mediante la educación. Según la teoría de la singularidad tecnológica en conjunción con el concepto de Transhumanismo, se sugiere que pronto tendremos la posibilidad de programar de forma «artificial» nuestra propia evolución de la forma más beneficiosa para todos,[7]​ aunque, no obstante, existen críticas al respecto.[8]​[9]​[10]​
es-->El altruismo puede entenderse como altruismo puro, donde no existen apego ni deseo, como en el caso del budismo, o bien como «egoísmo altruista», como en el caso del cristianismo, donde existen apego a un ser superior y el deseo de obtener la salvación. En la práctica, en ambas religiones existen apego y deseo, y en el budismo existe una última etapa previa a la iluminación que consiste en la renunciación a todos los logros conseguidos a cambio de nada, con el objetivo de destruir el ego completamente. Para el llamado «altruismo puro», no existe posibilidad de negociación; las relaciones no son competitivas, sino colaborativas: uno procura el bienestar de los demás sin esperar nada a cambio, y los demás procuran el bienestar de uno.
es-->El budismo sitúa al apego y al deseo como emociones negativas que también producen ira y, en definitiva, sufrimiento. Apego, deseo, ira, miedo e ignorancia (por ejemplo, falta de comprensión del sufrimiento ajeno) contribuyen a reforzar el ego. En la filosofía budista, el amor real es el amor compasivo, y el amor y el ego son incompatibles.[11]​ Recientes estudios científicos han demostrado que la meditación produce un incremento de la actividad en las zonas cerebrales relacionadas con las emociones positivas y una disminución de la actividad en las zonas relacionadas con la ira y la depresión.[12]​[13]​
es-->El «egoísmo altruista» es la filosofía de las relaciones humanas predicada por Jesucristo («ama a Dios sobre todas las cosas y al prójimo como a ti mismo»).
es-->El altruismo es la forma de entender el amor para Leibniz, quien cree que, si uno realmente entiende y busca el amor, siempre obtendrá placer en la felicidad de otro.[14]​
es-->Amar verdaderamente, y de un modo desinteresado, no es otra cosa que encontrar placer en las perfecciones o en la felicidad del objeto.[15]​
es-->La psicología humanista considera que el amor es indispensable para conseguir una autoestima saludable.
es-->Es imposible la salud psicológica, a no ser que lo esencial de la persona sea fundamentalmente aceptado, amado y respetado por otros y por ella misma.[16]​
es-->Abraham Maslow sitúa al amor en el estrato de afiliación, entre el de seguridad y el de reconocimiento, dentro de su jerarquía de las necesidades humanas.[17]​
es-->Matthieu Ricard, doctor en bioquímica y monje budista, pone como ejemplo los comportamientos altruistas que existieron entre judíos desconocidos entre sí durante la ocupación nazi para ilustrar el hecho de que los seres humanos somos altruistas por naturaleza. «¿Cómo cabe pensar que actuasen por egoísmo en esa situación?», argumenta.
es-->Matthieu Ricard se sometió a un exhaustivo estudio mediante escáneres cerebrales bajo un estado especial de meditación en el que se genera un estado de amor y compasión puros y no enfocados hacia nada ni nadie en particular. Los resultados mostraron un aumento sin precedentes en la actividad del córtex prefrontal izquierdo del cerebro, relacionado con las emociones positivas, mientras que la actividad en la zona del lóbulo derecho relacionada con la depresión disminuía, como si la compasión fuese un buen antídoto contra la depresión. Y también disminuía la actividad de la amígdala, relacionada con el miedo y la ira. Por otro lado, un grupo de empleados de una empresa realizaron 30 minutos diarios de meditación durante 3 meses. A lo largo del estudio, reportaron un descenso en sus niveles de ansiedad, y se pudo ver que también se incrementaba la actividad de su córtex prefrontal izquierdo.[12]​[13]​
es-->La concepción anterior es diametralmente opuesta a la del capitalismo, que promueve el llamado «egoísmo inherente al ser humano», y sobre el cual se basa.[18]​ Ayn Rand defiende que el egoísmo es en esencia un sentimiento noble, y que cada persona es responsable de su propia felicidad y no de la de los demás. Este pensamiento está íntimamente ligado al capitalismo puro.[19]​
es-->Juro, por mi vida y por mi amor por ella, que nunca viviré por el bien de otro hombre, ni pediré a otro hombre que viva por el mío.[20]​
es-->El amor sexual, en cualquiera de sus variantes, constituye asimismo un amor marcadamente egoísta; lo que se manifiesta como un altruismo hacia la pareja constituye una manifestación de puro egoísmo respecto al resto de la sociedad; el propio acto sexual se desarrolla bajo un estado de egoísmo personal en el que el individuo busca su propio placer, ya sea de forma directa o por la gratificación que le produce el placer de su pareja. En la misma línea, Sigmund Freud consideraba que todas las motivaciones humanas tenían un trasfondo libidinoso, y, por lo tanto, egoísta. Al considerar el amor compasivo sublimado, describe al amor como un comportamiento exclusivamente narcisista; para él las personas solo aman lo que fueron, lo que son, o lo que ambicionan ser; distingue, incluso, entre grados saludables y patológicos de narcisismo. Escribió, entre otras cosas, que el amor incondicional de una madre lleva a una perpetua insatisfacción: «Cuando uno fue incontestablemente el hijo favorito de su madre, mantiene durante toda su vida ese sentimiento de vencedor, mantiene el sentimiento de seguridad en el éxito, que en realidad raramente se satisface». Es una forma de entender las relaciones humanas que se ha extendido durante el siglo XX desde Estados Unidos a otros países occidentales, y actualmente existe una dura pugna entre sus defensores y detractores. Francia y Argentina son los dos países que más se resisten a abandonar la cultura del psicoanálisis. En España, más del 9% de los psicólogos siguen ya este paradigma.[21]​[22]​
es-->El capitalismo sitúa a la sociedad dentro del marco de un proceso de producción. Con este marco, el amor se convierte en un elemento más de dicho proceso. Las empresas analizan al ser humano y buscan la forma de extraer de él la mayor cantidad de consumo, no dudando en utilizar el amor y el sexo como reclamo de un modo desnaturalizado y grotesco: la empresa evoca en el consumidor sentimientos amorosos y de deseo, pero su fin último no es buscar el amor ni el sexo por parte del consumidor, sino su dinero y su trabajo. Como consecuencia, se produce deshumanización al identificarse el amor a otro ser humano con el amor a un producto, ya que dicha asociación trae, inevitablemente, la asociación del propio ser humano con un producto. Gilles Deleuze y Félix Guattari consideran que el capitalismo produce una perversión del concepto natural del amor, situando al ser humano como parte de una máquina productora y destruyendo el concepto del cuerpo y el alma.[23]​ Escriben, en Anti-Edipo: «el capitalismo recoge y posee la potencia absurda y no poseída de la máquina. [...] en verdad, no es para él ni para sus hijos que el capitalista trabaja, sino para la inmortalidad del sistema. Violencia sin finalidad, alegría, pura alegría de sentirse en un engranaje de la máquina, atravesado por los flujos, cortado por las esquizias.»[24]​ Michel Foucault, refiriéndose a la sociedad capitalista, insiste en su prefacio de 1977 para la edición inglesa de Introducción al esquizoanálisis que se opone «no solo al fascismo histórico, sino también al fascismo que hay en todos nosotros, en nuestras cabezas y en nuestro comportamiento diario, el fascismo que nos hace amar el poder, desear esa misma cosa que nos domina y explota».[25]​ Podemos encontrar una abierta declaración de muchos de los actualmente tácitos valores del capitalismo agresivo en el Manifiesto futurista, escrito por Filippo Tommaso Marinetti, en 1909.
es-->Dentro de la cadena productiva, o, como se la conoce en el mundo anglosajón, «cadena de comodidad», la mentira también es un elemento válido; de hecho, es un elemento recurrente y necesario para que el sistema no sucumba. Es, literalmente, lo que en política se conoce por demagogia; se miente al consumidor con propósitos egoístas, y ello lleva, según los autores anteriormente citados, a una «esquizofrenia» de las relaciones humanas a todos los niveles, haciendo imposible el amor real.[23]​
es-->Werner Sombart consideraba la desnaturalización del amor en la sociedad como una última etapa de un proceso destructivo de evolución que no es privativo de la cultura occidental: En primer lugar, el amor perdió su individualidad con el cristianismo, que lo unificó y teocratizó: ningún amor era genuino si no provenía de Dios, si no era aprobado por la Iglesia. Le siguió un período de «emancipación de la carne», que comenzó con tímidas tentativas y que se continuó, con los trovadores, con un período de sensualidad más acentuada, de desarrollo pleno del amor libre e ingenuo. Por último, aparecieron una etapa de gran refinamiento y, como colofón, la relajación moral y la perversión.[26]​
es-->En las relaciones de la persona con su medio, el amor se ha clasificado en diferentes manifestaciones; en virtud de ello, pueden aparecer una o más de las siguientes:
es-->Amor autopersonal: El amor propio, amor compasivo, es, desde el punto de vista de la psicología humanista, el sano amor hacia uno mismo. Aparece situado como prerrequisito de la autoestima y, en cierto contexto, como sinónimo de ésta. Es algo positivo para el desarrollo personal e indispensable para las buenas relaciones interpersonales,[17]​ y no debe confundirse con el narcisismo, que conlleva egocentrismo y que coincide con una autoestima baja.[27]​ Para el budismo, que califica al ego como una mera ilusión de nuestra mente, el amor real, amor compasivo, sólo existe cuando se dirige hacia otra persona, y no hacia uno mismo. Para el psicoanálisis, que, de forma completamente opuesta al budismo, califica al ego como la única realidad, el amor autopersonal siempre es narcisismo, que puede ser, a su vez, saludable o no saludable.
es-->Amor incondicional: Es el amor compasivo, altruista, que se profesa sin esperar nada a cambio. El amor espiritual, predicado por las diferentes religiones, es el amor incondicional por antonomasia. El amor maternal, o amor de madre a hijo, se reconoce también como amor de este tipo, y, por tradición, se considera motivado por un fuerte instinto que lo hace especialmente intenso; no obstante, hay también quien cuestiona la existencia de dicho instinto.[28]​
es-->Amor filial: Entre hijos y padres (y, por extensión, entre descendientes y ancestros).
es-->Amor fraternal: En su sentido estricto, es el afecto entre hermanos, aunque puede extenderse a otros parientes exceptuados los padres y los descendientes. Nace de un sentimiento profundo de gratitud y reconocimiento a la familia, y se manifiesta por emociones que apuntan a la convivencia, la colaboración y la identificación de cada sujeto dentro de una estructura de parentesco. Desde el punto de vista del psicoanálisis, el fraternal es, al igual que el amor filial, sublimado, ya que está fundado en la interdicción del incesto.
es-->Amistad: Cercano al amor fraternal, es un sentimiento que nace de la necesidad de los seres humanos de socializar. El amor al prójimo nace a su vez del uso de la facultad de la mente de empatizar y tolerar, y constituye la abstracción de la amistad. Para Erich Fromm, dicho amor al prójimo equivale al amor fraternal y al amor predicado en la Biblia mediante la frase «amarás al prójimo como a ti mismo».[29]​
es-->Amor romántico: Nace en la expectativa de que un ser humano cercano colme a uno de satisfacción y felicidad existencial. Este sentimiento idealiza en cierto grado a la persona objeto de dicha expectativa, definida en la psiquis.
es-->Amor confluente: Amor entre personas capaces de establecer relaciones de pareja, definido a mediados del siglo XX. Aparece por oposición al amor romántico: no tiene que ser único, no tiene que ser para siempre, no supone una entrega incondicional, etc.[30]​
es-->Amor sexual: Incluye el amor romántico y el amor confluente. El deseo sexual, según Helen Fisher, es diferente del amor romántico y del afecto (véase su estudio al respecto). Desde el punto de vista de la psicología humanista, el amor romántico —y el amor interpersonal en general— está relacionado en gran medida con la autoestima.
es-->Amor platónico: Con propiedad, es un concepto filosófico que consiste en la elevación de la manifestación de una idea hasta su contemplación, que varía desde la apariencia de la belleza hasta el conocimiento puro y desinteresado de su esencia. Para Platón, el verdadero amor es el que nace de la sabiduría, es decir, del conocimiento.[31]​ Vulgarmente, se conoce como una forma de amor en que no hay un elemento sexual o éste se da de forma mental, imaginativa o idealística y no de forma física.
es-->Amor a los animales y a las plantas: Nace de un sentimiento protector.
es-->Amor hacia algo abstracto o inanimado: A un objeto físico, una idea, una meta, a la patria (patriotismo), al lugar de nacimiento, al honor, a la independencia (integridad). Puede considerarse amor platónico en su sentido filosófico. El patriotismo puede ir asociado a la heroicidad, en cuyo caso constituye un comportamiento de altruismo respecto a su grupo, que en esencia es un comportamiento de egoísmo respecto a otro grupo en la medida en que no se considera al otro grupo de la misma condición.
es-->Amor hacia un dios o una deidad (devoción): Suele nacer de la educación recibida desde la infancia, y se basa en la fe. Se considera a Dios como la fuente de todo amor. En la mayoría de los casos, existe la creencia de que, tras la muerte, Dios premiará de alguna forma a las personas que la correspondiente religión considere virtuosas.
es-->Amor universal: Amor espiritual que, según diferentes religiones, todas las personas pueden llegar a profesar al medio natural y que los grandes místicos experimentan como expresión del nirvana, éxtasis o iluminación, estados de conexión absoluta con el universo o con Dios. Es una manifestación sublime en la que se eclipsan o confluyen el resto de las manifestaciones. Eckhart Tolle sostiene que el amor, como estado continuo, aún es muy raro y escaso, tan escaso como un ser humano consciente.[32]​
es-->Desde tiempos inmemoriales, el amor y todo lo relacionado con él se ha asociado con símbolos e iconos. De los que han sobrevivido hasta la actualidad, unos son autóctonos de las diferentes culturas o ligados a las costumbres de determinados lugares geográficos, y otros, con el paso de los siglos, se han convertido en interculturales o incluso universales en el mundo civilizado. Las flores, el color rojo, determinados perfumes o la música romántica, ensoñadora o erótica, son elementos que se repiten en una buena parte de las relaciones amorosas. En el caso de Occidente, los bombones, entre otros detalles, se interpretan en ocasiones con un significado amoroso. De todos los símbolos utilizados, los más característicos en la cultura occidental son el cupido, y, sobre todo, el corazón.
es-->La figura de Cupido en forma de putto es una imagen recurrente. En el caso del amor romántico, suele representarse con un arco y unas flechas, las cuales, a menudo con los ojos vendados, dispara sobre las personas, produciéndoles así el enamoramiento.
es-->El origen de Cupido se remonta a la mitología romana, si bien su figura ya existía en la mitología griega bajo el nombre de Eros, el dios primordial responsable de la atracción sexual, el amor y el sexo, venerado también como un dios de la fertilidad.
es-->La flecha de Cupido también posee orígenes grecolatinos, y su influencia se hizo notar claramente en la poesía española desde la época medieval, aun sin la aparición del dios Amor. Bajo múltiples nombres (vira, asta, flecha, saeta, tiros, arpón, dardo, espina...), aparece en la literatura medieval, renacentista y posrenacentista con un sentido amoroso que se repite indefinidamente con pocos matices diferentes y mucha retórica. Sin embargo, el tema de la flecha alcanza un plano más elevado, teñido de toques conceptuales nuevos con dimensión trascendente y expresión paradójica, cuando se desarrolla en versiones a lo divino. De éstas, es significativa la narración de Santa Teresa de Jesús en un pasaje del Libro de su vida, en el que cuenta su transverberación en presencia de Serafín.[33]​
es-->A partir del Renacimiento, la figura de los putti llegó a confundirse con los querubines, confusión que perdura en la actualidad. Tanto los putti como los cupidos y ángeles pueden encontrarse en el arte religioso y secular desde la década de 1420 en Italia, desde finales del siglo XVI en los Países Bajos y Alemania, desde el período manierista y el Renacimiento tardío en Francia, y a lo largo del Barroco en frescos de techos. Los han representado tantos artistas que presentar la lista de estos sería poco útil, aunque entre los más conocidos se encuentran el escultor Donatello y el pintor Rafael; dos putti en actitud curiosa y relajada que aparecen a los pies de su Madonna Sixtina son reproducidos con frecuencia.[34]​
es-->Experimentaron una revitalización importante en el siglo XIX, y comenzaron a aparecer retozando en obras de pintores académicos, desde las ilustraciones de Gustave Doré para Orlando Furioso, hasta anuncios. Actualmente son un motivo muy utilizado como representación del amor en imágenes destinadas a la mercadotecnia; tal es el caso de muchas postales de San Valentín.
es-->El símbolo del corazón es el que más frecuentemente se relaciona con el amor. Cuando aparece atravesado por la flecha de Cupido, simboliza el amor romántico, y es la forma común en la que las parejas adolescentes lo dibujan en los más variopintos lugares para dejar constancia de su amor. También se hace alusión al corazón real o al pecho de los amantes como fuente y receptáculo del amor, y son comunes expresiones como «partir» o «romper el corazón» como sinónimo de crear desamor, «robar el corazón» como sinónimo de producir enamoramiento, «abrir el corazón» como sinónimo de ofrecer amor, y una larga lista con significados en los que los elementos comunes son el amor y el alma.[35]​
es-->El origen del corazón del amor parece ser incierto, y existen diversas teorías. La idea del corazón como fuente de amor se remonta como mínimo a hace varios milenios en la India, China y Japón, con el concepto de chakras como centros de la «energía vital universal», de los cuales el que se encuentra a la altura del corazón se manifiesta, según se afirma, en forma de amor y compasión.
es-->Respecto al símbolo propiamente dicho, hay quien lo atribuye a una planta originaria del norte de África, conocida como silfio[36]​ (generalmente considerada un hinojo gigante extinto, aunque algunos afirman que la planta es realmente Ferula tingitana;[37]​ no confundir con el género actual Silphium). Durante el siglo VII a. C., la ciudad-estado de Cirene tenía un lucrativo negocio con dicha planta. Aunque se usaba principalmente como condimento, tenía la reputación de poseer un valor adicional como método anticonceptivo. La planta era tan importante para la economía de Cirene que se acuñaron monedas con la imagen de la vaina o cáscara,[38]​ la cual tenía la forma del símbolo del corazón que conocemos actualmente. Según esta teoría, dicho símbolo se asoció inicialmente con el sexo, y, posteriormente, con el amor.[39]​
es-->La Iglesia católica sostiene que la forma del símbolo no apareció hasta el siglo XVII, cuando Santa Margarita María Alacoque tuvo una visión del mismo rodeado de espinas. Este símbolo se hizo conocido como el Sagrado Corazón de Jesús, se asoció con el amor y la devoción, y empezó a aparecer a menudo en vidrieras y otros tipos de iconografía eclesiástica. No obstante, aunque el Sagrado Corazón probablemente popularizase el símbolo que hoy conocemos, la mayoría de los eruditos coinciden en que ya existía desde mucho antes del siglo XV.[39]​
es-->Existen otras ideas menos románticas acerca del origen. Algunos afirman que la forma actual del símbolo surgió simplemente de burdos intentos de dibujar un corazón humano real, el órgano que los antiguos, entre ellos Aristóteles, creían ser el contenedor de todas las pasiones. Un importante erudito sobre la iconografía del corazón sostiene que la imprecisa descripción anatómica que hizo el filósofo, como un órgano de tres cámaras con la parte superior redondeada y la inferior puntiaguda, pudo haber inspirado a los artistas medievales a la hora de crear lo que hoy conocemos como la «forma de corazón».[40]​ A su vez, la tradición medieval del amor cortés pudo haber reforzado la asociación del símbolo con el amor romántico.[39]​
es-->Los corazones proliferaron cuando el intercambio de postales de San Valentín ganó popularidad en Inglaterra en el siglo XVII. En un principio, las cartas eran simples, pero los victorianos hicieron que fuesen más elaboradas, empleando el símbolo del corazón en conjunción con cintas y lazos.[39]​
es-->Actualmente, el símbolo está extendido por todo el mundo civilizado, y puede encontrarse en los más diversos ámbitos, lugares y momentos, incluyendo los naipes de diversas barajas, como la inglesa, la francesa o la bávara, tapices, pinturas,[39]​ y como elemento decorativo en objetos cotidianos. También constituye el emblema de la Cardiología.[41]​
es-->El carácter irracional e indescriptible de la atávica experiencia amorosa y, probablemente, la existencia de un instinto religioso natural, hacen que otro aspecto íntimamente relacionado con el amor sea la superstición. El horóscopo, la adivinación, o la utilización de sustancias, objetos y rituales con cualidades pretendidamente mágicas o milagrosas, son, entre otras, creencias y prácticas que persisten desde la antigüedad, algunas de las cuales, como las religiones, están fuertemente arraigadas desde hace milenios (véase la sección Perspectiva espiritual en este mismo artículo). El advenimiento del Racionalismo en el siglo XVII y el vertiginoso desarrollo de la ciencia en el último siglo contribuyeron en gran medida a reducir el impacto de la superstición sobre el pensamiento. No obstante, aún existen determinadas culturas, como las de tribus africanas por ejemplo, donde es posible encontrar el pensamiento puramente mágico, así como significativos sectores de la población del mundo civilizado que, al margen de las religiones, aceptadas y asumidas socialmente, todavía relacionan el amor con lo sobrenatural, y testimonio de ello son las ventas de libros sobre la Nueva Era o el lucrativo negocio de los adivinadores y cartomantes a través de medios de comunicación como la televisión o la radio. En palabras de Helen Fisher, el amor es el resultado de reacciones químicas, y el conocimiento de tal hecho no es óbice para su disfrute:
es-->Yo tengo que decirles que sí, que todo es química. Cada vez que producimos un pensamiento, o tenemos una motivación, o experimentamos una emoción, siempre se trata de química. Sin embargo, es posible conocer todos y cada uno de los ingredientes de un pastel de chocolate, y que aún nos guste sentarnos y comerlo. De la misma manera, podemos conocer toda la química que hay detrás del amor romántico –todavía no la conocemos toda, pero estamos empezando a conocerla en parte- y aun así ser capaces de captar toda su enorme magia.
es-->Popularmente, el amor se considera un sentimiento. En los casos más comunes, dicho sentimiento se basa en la atracción y la admiración de un sujeto hacia otro.
es-->Habitualmente se asocia el término con el amor romántico —una relación pasional y sexual entre dos personas que produce una influencia muy importante en sus vidas—, que intensifica las relaciones interpersonales entre ambos sujetos, quienes, partiendo de su propia insuficiencia, desean el encuentro y la unión con aquel que han juzgado ser el complemento para su existencia.
es-->Sin embargo, se aplica también a otras relaciones diferentes —tales como el amor platónico o el amor familiar—, y, en un sentido más amplio, del amor hacia Dios, el arte, la belleza, la humanidad o la naturaleza, lo que suele asociarse con la empatía y otras capacidades. En la mayoría de los casos, implica un gran afecto por algo que ocasiona felicidad o placer al que ama.
es-->El amor es un concepto en contraste frecuente con el odio, el desprecio o el egoísmo. No obstante, también está relativamente extendida la idea de que «solo hay un paso del amor al odio (o viceversa)», y son típicas las «peleas de enamorados», así como, en algunas personas, las relaciones patológicas de amor-odio, producidas estas últimas, según un estudio de la Universidad de Yale, por una autoestima baja.[43]​ Para Helen Fisher, la convivencia del amor y el odio en las relaciones amorosas es algo que, hasta cierto punto, tiene sentido, ya que lo sugiere el hecho de que, en muchos aspectos conductuales y fisiológicos, las respuestas del amor y el odio son análogas (ver la sección Aspectos antropológicos de este mismo artículo).
es-->Culturas como la budista consideran al apego y al deseo emociones negativas que producen ira y sufrimiento; el amor y el ego son incompatibles. En la filosofía budista, el amor real es el amor compasivo. Con independencia de su origen —incluso en el caso del amor—, el apego produce sufrimiento (espiritual). El movimiento hippie, surgido en los años 1960, presentaba en sus inicios un acercamiento similar al apego. Asimismo, este movimiento utilizó el amor como uno de los principales baluartes de la contracultura de los años 1960, ejemplificado en el eslogan make love, not war ('haz el amor, no la guerra').
es-->Cabe resaltar el uso actual de la palabra amor para designar tanto el amor espiritual y el amor romántico como el propio acto sexual —mediante la expresión «hacer el amor». Hasta mediados del siglo XX, esa expresión estaba reservada para el galanteo.[44]​
es-->Las personas tienden a aplicar el concepto del amor de un modo intuitivo desde y hacia otros animales (normalmente próximos en la escala evolutiva o que muestran signos interpretables como inteligencia) y hacia otros seres vivos como las plantas. En el primer caso, a menudo se debe a que los signos externos al ser humano son interpretados de forma antropocéntrica; por ejemplo, el gesto de un perro que acude a lamer la mano del dueño se interpreta como una demostración de amor; sin embargo, los procesos psicológicos que producen ese tipo de comportamientos en el perro responden, según los conocimientos científicos actuales, a otro tipo de motivaciones mucho menos complejas que las de los seres humanos, como lo puede ser, por ejemplo, la necesidad de mantenimiento de la manada, heredada de su ancestro evolutivo, el lobo.[45]​ En el caso de las plantas, es el hecho de que sepamos que la planta también es un ser vivo, como nosotros, lo que la hace objeto de nuestro amor. En ciertos casos, se llega al extremo de pensar que el amor en sí mismo beneficia a la planta. Y, realmente, la beneficia, aunque de forma indirecta, a través de nuestras acciones.
es-->En Psicología de la posible evolución del hombre y en Cuarto Camino, George Gurdjieff y Piotr Uspenski distinguen entre «sentir» y la «función emocional superior» y «función cognitiva superior». El primer caso es el que está accesible para la mayoría de las personas, y es el que se suele incluir en los diccionarios, que definen el amor como un sentimiento. No obstante, ese mundanal sentimiento de apego y deseo difiere mucho de lo que constituye el verdadero amor, al que sólo se accede escalando en el nivel de conciencia desde el ordinario hasta uno presente en pocas personas, y aún en menos de forma permanente, y que en la mayoría de las personas que lo experimentan sólo sucede una vez en la vida.
es-->La subida del nivel de conciencia produce cambios a nivel de la percepción: de repente se comienzan a encontrar significados donde antes no se veían, el encuentro con el ser amado «parece» estar rodeado de una atmósfera de cuento de hadas (no sólo lo parece, realmente lo está pues el mundo real es así), y el sentido de la vista se vuelve más atractivo; por ejemplo, «da la impresión» de que se perciben más y mejor los colores, las texturas, las formas. El ingenio se acentúa, de repente «uno» se sorprende a sí mismo con expresiones artísticas que por momentos no reconoce como propias, y el ego se disipa: uno pasa a ver el mundo como si viese una película de cine, de tal modo que se olvida de sí mismo y de su pareja como cuerpos y los acontecimientos parecen fluir de un modo más suave, más grácil, el espíritu florece como un manantial compasivo hacia todas las cosas, y en algunos casos se llega a la producción de experiencias «milagrosas» (realmente, sin comillas), en las que se dan coincidencias sorprendentes (amigos que casualmente aparecen en lugares totalmente inesperados, canciones que comienzan a sonar en el momento adecuado, y, en general, la «sensación» de que el mundo se adapta a los enamorados a su paso), lo cual a su vez refuerza el amor y contribuye a profundizar en el estado aún más. Tal vez por el implacable escepticismo del ego, y por las numerosas experiencias microtraumáticas y estresantes que, sobre todo en ausencia del ser amado, experimentamos en el trabajo, en el hogar, en la calle, termina por aparecer una «masa crítica» que de forma irreversible e inevitable gana la batalla a la fe creada en torno a la magia de la relación amorosa, que era precisamente lo que mantenía el nivel de conciencia elevado. No obstante, son experiencias que, al evocarlas, y debido a que se fijaron con fuerza en la memoria, aparecen en el recuerdo, aunque como si procediesen de la nada, como sucedidas en otro universo inalcanzable. Es lo que los enamorados suelen describir como la «magia del amor», que suele aparecer de forma más generosa con el primer amor verdadero de la vida, y que generalmente no dura más de unos pocos días, y de forma discontinua, para ser sustituida por la experiencia del ego, de la personalidad: el apego y el deseo. El individuo deja de ser creativo y se vuelve rutinario y predecible. Desde su nuevo punto de vista en una conciencia disminuida, y debido a que ha olvidado completamente su reciente vivencia en un plano superior de la conciencia, él cree continuar viviéndolo como amor verdadero, pero ya es simplemente un conjunto limitado de emociones, experiencias y actitudes. La magia (sin comillas) se pierde y lo que antes eran dos almas en una fundidas con el universo (o con Dios, si se quiere) ahora son vacío interior, y lo que antes era una visión paisajística, brillante, colorida, de transparencia en el aire, donde en ocasiones, incluso, se mezclaban los sentidos entre sí, ahora es la percepción de lo que se cree ser el «yo», que realmente es la de un animal homínido sujeto a respuestas mecánicas, un «yo» engañoso, pobre y fragmentado en decenas o cientos de «yoes» desconectados entre sí.
es-->En cuanto al sexo, en estados evolucionados de la conciencia se produce lo que llamaremos «sexo espiritual». Es una entrega compasiva al ser amado, donde la unión carnal constituye un elemento de máxima sacralidad: es, de hecho, el origen de la creación de la vida. El ego no existe, y como consecuencia se pierden todos los elementos morbosos, que son sustituidos por sentimientos de pureza e inocencia. La tensión emocional que existe en el sexo ordinario es sustituida por una sensación de fluidez, de flotar en el vacío, acompañada por un flujo suave y sin límites de amor compasivo que energetiza los cuerpos y que se expande de forma explosiva en el orgasmo, liberándose finalmente gran parte de la energía acumulada.
es-->En la novela Las Nueve Revelaciones, James Redfield explica muchos de los fenómenos que se producen en el Cuarto Camino, incluyendo la aparición del amor real.
es-->Helen Fisher indica que durante el enamoramiento pueden producirse de forma natural sustancias como la dopamina, la anfetamina o el bupropión, lo cual podría explicar los efectos anteriormente citados.
es-->En la cultura religiosa monoteísta, el amor suele mencionarse y ser apoyado por Dios, como es el caso del Islam, el judaísmo y el cristianismo. Aquellas personas cuyo amor está o se supone que está cercano al Amor Universal, o a Dios, reciben el nombre de santos. Tanto en el budismo como en el cristianismo, el Islam, el hinduismo o el judaísmo suelen representarse con una aureola alrededor de su cabeza. Los budas son presentados con aureolas adicionales alrededor de todo su cuerpo.
es-->En hebreo, ahavá es el término más comúnmente usado tanto para el amor interpersonal como para el amor de Dios.
es-->El judaísmo emplea una definición amplia del amor, tanto entre personas como entre los seres humanos y la deidad. Respecto al primer caso, en la Torah se afirma: «Ama a tu prójimo como a ti mismo» (Levítico 19:18). Respecto al segundo, a los seres humanos se les manda amar a Dios «con todo el corazón, con toda el alma y con todas las fuerzas» (Deuteronomio 6:5), tomado de la Mishná (un texto central de la tradición oral judía) para referirse a los buenos actos, la buena voluntad para sacrificar la vida en lugar de cometer ciertas transgresiones graves, la buena voluntad para sacrificar todas las posesiones, y el agradecimiento al Señor a pesar de la adversidad (tratado de bərākhāh 9:5). La literatura rabínica se diferencia de lo anterior en cómo este amor puede desarrollarse: por ejemplo, mediante la contemplación de los bienes divinos o la observación de las maravillas de la naturaleza.
es-->En lo concerniente al amor entre compañeros de matrimonio, éste está considerado un ingrediente esencial de la vida: «Observa la vida con la esposa que amas» (Eclesiastés 9:9). El libro bíblico Cantar de los Cantares se considera una metáfora romántica del amor entre Dios y su pueblo, pero, en su lectura literal, aparece como una canción de amor.
es-->El rabino del siglo XX Eliyahu Eliezer Dessler es citado frecuentemente como definidor del amor desde el punto de vista judaico, de «dar sin esperar nada a cambio» (Michtav me-Eliyahu, Vol. 1).
es-->En el cristianismo se entiende que el amor proviene de Dios, porque el amor es una virtud teologal. El amor de hombre y mujer —eros en griego— y el amor desinteresado por los demás (agápē) se contrastan a menudo como amor «ascendente» y «descendente», respectivamente, aunque en última instancia son una misma cosa.[46]​
es-->Muchos teólogos cristianos ven a Dios como fuente de amor, que es reflejado en el ser humano y sus propias relaciones amorosas. C. S. Lewis, influente teólogo anglicano, escribió varios libros sobre el amor, especialmente The Four Loves. El Papa Benedicto XVI, en su encíclica Deus Caritas Est (o sea, Dios es Amor), también pretendió reflexionar sobre el amor divino para con el ser humano y la relación entre el ágape y el eros.
es-->Existen varias palabras griegas para el «amor» que se utilizan con frecuencia en ámbitos cristianos.
es-->Agape: En el Nuevo Testamento, agapē es caritativo, desinteresado, altruista e incondicional. Es el amor de los padres, visto como creador del bien en el mundo; es el modo en el que se ve a Dios amar a la humanidad, y es la clase de amor que los cristianos aspiran a tener por sus semejantes.
es-->Phileo: También usado en el Nuevo Testamento, es una respuesta humana a algo que se ha encontrado muy agradable. También conocido como amor fraternal.
es-->Las palabras eros (amor sexual) y storge (amor entre hijos y padres) nunca se usaron en el Nuevo Testamento.
es-->Los cristianos creen que amar a Dios con todo el corazón, mente y fuerza (sobre todas las cosas) y amar al prójimo como a uno mismo son las dos cosas más importantes en la vida (el mayor mandamiento de la Torah de los judíos, según Jesús);[47]​ San Agustín resumió este pensamiento al escribir «ama a Dios, y haz lo que quieras».
es-->El apóstol San Pablo glorificó el amor como la mayor de las virtudes. Describiéndolo en el famoso poema Primera epístola a los corintios, escribió:
es-->«El amor es paciente, es servicial; el amor no es envidioso, no hace alarde, no se envanece,
es-->no procede con bajeza, no busca su propio interés, no se irrita, no tiene en cuenta el mal recibido,
es-->no se alegra de la injusticia, sino que se regocija con la verdad.
es-->El amor todo lo disculpa, todo lo cree, todo lo espera, todo lo soporta».
es-->En la Primera epístola de Juan, capítulo 4, se dice:
es-->«Queridos míos, amémonos los unos a los otros, porque el amor procede de Dios, y el que ama ha nacido de Dios y conoce a Dios. El que no ama no ha conocido a Dios, porque Dios es amor».
es-->El apóstol San Juan también escribió:
es-->«Sí, Dios amó tanto al mundo, que entregó a su Hijo único para que todo el que cree en él no muera, sino que tenga Vida eterna».
es-->San Agustín dice que es preciso ser capaz de descifrar la diferencia entre amor y lujuria. Lujuria, según San Agustín, es un gran vicio y pecado, pero amar y ser amado es lo que este santo ha buscado toda su vida. Él mismo dice: «yo estaba en el amor con amor». Finalmente, él hace caer en el amor y es amado de vuelta, por Dios. San Agustín dice que la única persona que puede amarte verdaderamente y plenamente es Dios, porque el amor de los hombres tiene muchas fallas, tales como «celo, desconfianza, miedo, rabia y discordia». De acuerdo con este santo, Dios es amor «para alcanzar la paz». (del libro: Las Confesiones de Santo Agustín).
es-->La iglesia católica, reafirmando las enseñanzas del su Magisterio y de la Teología del Cuerpo del Papa Juan Pablo II, afirmó que el amor es una virtud teologal,[49]​ una «dádiva de sí mismo», y «es lo opuesto al desamor».[50]​ Aplicado en las relaciones conyugales humanas, el amor verdaderamente vivido y plenamente realizado es una comunión de dádiva mutua de sí mismos, «de afirmación mutua de la dignidad de cada pareja» y un «encuentro de dos libertades en entrega y receptividad mutuas».[51]​ Esa comunión conyugal del hombre y de la mujer es un icono de la vida de la Santísima Trinidad y lleva no solo a la satisfacción, sino también a la santidad.[52]​ Ese tipo de relación conyugal propuesta por la Iglesia exige permanencia y compromiso matrimoniales.[53]​ Por esa razón, la sexualidad es una fuente de alegría y placer,[54]​ no ejerce solo la función de procrear, sino que también juega un papel importante en la vida íntima conyugal.[55]​ La relación sexual conyugal es considerada como la gran expresión «humana y totalmente humanizada» del Amor idealizado por la Iglesia, donde el hombre y la mujer se unen y se complementan recíprocamente.[56]​ Todo este amor conyugal propuesto por la Iglesia requiere fidelidad, «permanencia y compromiso», que solo puede ser auténticamente vivido «en el seno de los lazos del Matrimonio» y en la castidad conyugal.[57]​
es-->En cierto sentido, el amor abarca la visión islámica de la vida como una hermandad universal que se aplica a todos los que mantienen la fe. No existen referencias directas que afirmen que Dios es amor, pero entre los 99 nombres de Dios (Allah), existe el nombre de Al-Wadūd (الودود), o «el Amante», que se encuentra en la Azora 11:90 y en la Azora 85:14. Se refiere a Dios como «pleno de amorosa amabilidad». Todos los que tengan fe tendrán el amor de Dios, aunque el grado de amor recibido y el esfuerzo puesto para conseguirlo depende del individuo en sí mismo.
es-->Ishq, o el amor divino, es el tema principal del sufismo. Los sufís creen que el amor es una proyección de la esencia de Dios sobre el universo. Dios desea reconocer la belleza, de modo que, cuando, por ejemplo, alguien se mira en un espejo, es Dios quien se «mira» a sí mismo dentro de la dinámica de la naturaleza. Ya que todo es un reflejo de Dios, la escuela del sufismo practica ver la belleza dentro de la aparente fealdad. El sufismo se refiere a menudo a ello como la religión del amor. Dios aparece en tres términos principales, que son el Amante, el Amado y el Amor, pudiéndose encontrar el último de estos términos frecuentemente en la poesía sufí. Un punto de vista común es que, a través del amor, la humanidad puede volver a su pureza y gracia inherentes. Los santos sufistas son tristemente célebres por estar «borrachos» debido a su amor divino; por lo tanto, es constante la referencia al vino en la poesía y la música sufís.
es-->La palabra «amor» aparece en el Corán más de 80 veces en diferentes formas y significados; todas las aleyas que incluyen la palabra «amor», sean positivas o negativas, aseguran la grandeza del valor del amor en establecer las relaciones en sus diferentes formas y círculos.[58]​
es-->«Al·lâh traerá a otros a los que amará y por los que será amado».
es-->«Di: Si amáis a Al·lâh, seguidme, que Al·lâh os amará y perdonará vuestras faltas. Al·lâh es Perdonador y Compasivo».
es-->«Y pedid perdón a vuestro Señor y volveos a Él, pues es cierto que mi Señor es Compasivo, Afectuoso».
es-->En el Islam, existe una poderosa imbricación entre las leyes de Alá y las leyes de los hombres. Dentro de este marco, el amor se manifiesta en diversos círculos: El amor hacia Al·lâh, El amor hacia el Mensajero de Al∙lâh, El amor del musulmán hacia el musulmán, El amor dentro de la familia musulmana, El amor hacia el no musulmán, El cariño entre el gobernante y el gobernado.[58]​
es-->Según el Corán, Al∙lâh es El Afectuoso, El Muy Misericordioso y El Que ama a los equitativos y detesta a los injustos. La justicia es el mejor pilar para el amor entre la gente. La misericordia de Al∙lâh y los valores islámicos grandes y sublimes hacen del amor un espacio amplio que abarca a toda la gente. El primer paso que conduce a este amor es abrir las puertas del reconocimiento de los unos a los otros. Al·lâh, Enaltecido y Glorificado dice [lo que podemos traducir como]: «¡Hombres! Os hemos creado a partir de un varón y de una hembra y os hemos hecho pueblos y tribus distintos para que os reconocierais unos a otros. Y en verdad que el más noble de vosotros ante Al·lâh es el que más Le teme. Al·lâh es Conocedor y está perfectamente informado».[58]​[60]​ En otra azora aparecen estas palabras: «Y no te hemos enviado sino como misericordia para todos los mundos».[61]​
es-->Al∙lâh permite al musulmán casarse con una cristiana o una judía aunque una parte de sus creencias contradice al Islam y a los hábitos de los musulmanes. Y subraya que los cristianos son una gente digna de cariño: «...mientras que encontrarás que los que están más próximos en afecto a los que creen, son los que dicen: Somos cristianos».[58]​[62]​
es-->Existen otras aleyas que avisan de que los casos de rechazo hacia el otro (los no musulmanes) no son comunes, y que tampoco se aplican todo el tiempo. No se permite tratar como enemigos a los que no ejercen enemistad contra los musulmanes, tampoco se permite clasificarles como enemigos. Más bien, merecen otro tipo de tratamiento: «Al·lâh no os prohíbe que tratéis bien y con justicia a los que no os hayan combatido a causa de vuestra creencia ni os hayan hecho abandonar vuestros hogares. Ciertamente, Al·lâh ama a los equitativos».[58]​[63]​
es-->El Corán abre las puertas del bien, del cariño y del afecto ante los que se enemistan con los musulmanes: «Puede ser que Al·lâh ponga afecto entre vosotros y los que de ellos hayáis tenido como enemigos. Al·lâh es Poderoso y Al·lâh es Perdonador y Compasivo». Y entre los comentarios sobre esta aleya está la siguiente: «El afecto después del rechazo, el cariño después del odio, y la concordia después de la discordia. Al∙lâh es El Que Puede unir las cosas esparcidas y dispersas. Es El Que concilia entre los corazones después de la enemistad y la dureza y los reemplaza por el encuentro y la concordia».[58]​
es-->Escribe Mahmud Nacua: «El origen en las relaciones entre la gente, por diferentes que sean sus nacionalidades y creencias, es el hecho de reconocerse, de tener misericordia mutua, la cooperación, la amistad y la paz. La excepción es el estado de guerras y los combates, que son asuntos que producen odio. Esta excepción es temporal porque el odio no permanece entre la gente sean cuales sean las huellas de las guerras. El mundo experimentó tanto en las pasadas épocas como en las recientes muchos ejemplos de guerras que tuvieron lugar entre las tribus, los pueblos y las naciones. Entre un pueblo y otro, entre una nación y otra en una cierta época, pero fueron seguidos por acuerdos de paz, pactos y cooperación… Así es la naturaleza de la vida, unos ciclos consecutivos. El mejor de la gente es el que utiliza los ciclos del bien, de los acuerdos y de la paz para el desarrollo de los factores del bien y del amor inculcándolos entre los individuos y los pueblos. Este es el camino del Islam y este es el fundamento en el Islam».[58]​
es-->En el budismo, kāma es amor sensual, sexual. Es un obstáculo en el camino hacia la iluminación, ya que constituye egoísmo.
es-->Karuṇā es compasión y misericordia, y reduce el sufrimiento de otros. Es complementario de la sabiduría y necesario para la iluminación.
es-->Adveṣa y mettā son amor benevolente. Este amor es incondicional y requiere una autoaceptación considerable. Es bastante diferente del amor ordinario, que normalmente se basa en el apego y el sexo y que raramente ocurre sin interés propio. En su lugar, este amor se refiere al desprendimiento y la ausencia de intereses egoístas en beneficio de los demás.
es-->Desde el punto de vista del budismo, el amor «puro» proviene de un estado de pureza espiritual al que los seres humanos pueden llegar mediante la liberación de las llamadas emociones perturbadoras (deseo y apego, odio e ira, ignorancia, orgullo, envidia), inherentes al mundo material o samsara. Mediante la compasión, el desapego del mundo material, y la meditación, puede aumentarse paulatinamente la capacidad de funcionamiento de todos los chakras, incluyendo el chakra del corazón, de tal modo que es posible amar conscientemente y eliminar el sufrimiento asociado al amor ordinario hasta alcanzar el llamado estado de iluminación, en el que existe un amor incondicional hacia todos los seres sintientes, equiparable al que, por ejemplo, puede sentir una madre por su hijo. Según esta corriente de pensamiento, el amor mantiene unidas todas las cosas, y nuestra conciencia crea el propio universo. Para el budismo, todas las religiones son válidas si se basan en el amor espiritual y la compasión.[64]​[65]​[66]​[67]​
es-->El ideal de bodhisattva en el budismo Mahāyāna implica la completa renunciación a uno mismo con el objeto de soportar la carga de un mundo de sufrimiento. La mayor motivación que uno tiene para tomar el camino del bodhisattva es la idea de salvación que existe dentro del amor altruista y falto de egoísmo por todos los seres sintientes, idea que, como deseo que es, emoción perturbadora, deberá abandonarse también en última instancia para lograr la iluminación. Nótese que, en el budismo, buscar la felicidad es un acto egoísta: el ego nos impide comprender que la felicidad no es algo que nos llega de fuera, sino la manifestación de una conciencia libre de sufrimiento.
es-->En el hinduismo, kāma es el amor placentero, sexual, personificado por el dios Kāmadeva. Para muchas escuelas hinduistas, es el tercer final (artha) de la vida. Kāmadeva se representa a menudo sosteniendo un arco de caña de azúcar y una flecha de flores, y montado en ocasiones sobre un gran loro. Está normalmente acompañado por su consorte Rati y su compañero Vasanta, señor de la primavera. Pueden verse imágenes grabadas en piedra de Kaama y Rati en la puerta del templo de Chenna Keshava en Belur, en Karnataka, India. Maara es otro nombre para kāma.
es-->En contraste con kāma, prema —o prem— se refiere al amor elevado. Karuna es la compasión y misericordia, que impulsa a uno a reducir el sufrimiento de otros. Bhakti es un término del sánscrito, que significa «devoción amorosa hacia el supremo Dios». Una persona que practica bhakti se conoce como bhakta. Escritores, teólogos y filósofos hindúes han diferenciado nueve formas de bhakti, que pueden encontrarse en el Bhagavatha-Purana y en las obras de Tulsidas. La obra filosófica Sutras de Narada Bhakti, de autor desconocido (presumiblemente Narada), distingue once formas de amor.
es-->La filosofía oriental presenta una aproximación al amor espiritual diferente de la occidental: El sufrimiento en sí mismo no es lo que nos hace virtuosos, sino que es un medio para alcanzar la virtud, de tal modo que acercarse a la iluminación o el nirvana implica el cese paulatino del sufrimiento y el aumento del gozo. Al igual que en el cristianismo, el sufrimiento es un catártico (o vía de expiación) que nos conduce al estado iluminado (o a Dios en el cristianismo). Sin embargo, para la concepción oriental, preocuparse por conseguir un objetivo constituiría un modo de sufrimiento adicional (el apego y el deseo), de modo que deberíamos limitar nuestro sufrimiento no preocupándonos por el propio sufrimiento —incluyendo el deseo de conseguir metas—. En palabras de Osho:
es-->El amor es algo fácil, el odio es algo fácil, pero tú eliges. Dices: «Sólo voy a amar, no voy a odiar». Así todo se vuelve difícil. ¡Así ni siquiera puedes amar! Inspirar es fácil, espirar es fácil. Pero tú eliges. Dices: «Sólo voy a inspirar, no voy a espirar». De esta forma todo se vuelve difícil. La mente puede decir: «¿Para qué espirar? La respiración es vida. Simple aritmética: inspira, no expulses el aire; estarás cada vez más vivo. Acumularás más vida. Tendrás grandes reservas de vida. Inspira solamente, no espires porque espirar es morir». [...] El amor es inspirar, el odio espirar. ¿Qué hacer entonces? La vida es fácil si no decides, porque entonces sabes que inspirar y espirar no son dos cosas opuestas; son dos partes de un mismo proceso. Y estas dos partes son orgánicas, no puedes dividirlas. ¿Y si no espiras...? La lógica se equivoca. No vivirás; sencillamente, te morirás inmediatamente.
es-->El judaísmo y el cristianismo no conciben el amor sexual entre personas homosexuales. En la Biblia se hace mención expresa del rechazo, no solo al amor homosexual, sino a la homosexualidad en sí misma. Tres ejemplos:
es-->No te acuestes con un hombre como si te acostaras con una mujer. Eso es un acto infame.
es-->Si alguien se acuesta con un hombre como si se acostara con una mujer, se condenará a muerte a los dos, y serán responsables de su propia muerte, pues cometieron un acto infame.
es-->¿No sabéis que los injustos no heredarán el reino de Dios? No erréis; ni los fornicarios, ni los idólatras, ni los adúlteros, ni los afeminados, ni los que se echan con varones, ni los ladrones, ni los avaros, ni los borrachos, ni los maldicientes, ni los estafadores, heredarán el reino de Dios.
es-->La Iglesia católica actual mantiene dicho rechazo. Según unas polémicas declaraciones pronunciadas en diciembre de 2008 por el papa Benedicto XVI, «constituye una grave amenaza para la humanidad la confusión de los sexos».[72]​[73]​[74]​ En enero de 2012 declaró además que «el matrimonio homosexual socava el porvenir mismo de la humanidad».[75]​
es-->El islam, al igual que el cristianismo y el judaísmo, no concibe el amor homosexual y rechaza la homosexualidad en sí misma. En el Corán existe constancia de tal rechazo, como puede verse en los siguientes ejemplos, donde Lot critica a los hombres de Sodoma por su comportamiento sexual:
es-->Y a Lot. Cuando dijo a su pueblo: «¿Cometéis una deshonestidad que ninguna criatura ha cometido antes? Ciertamente, por concupiscencia, os llegáis a los hombres en lugar de llegaros a las mujeres. ¡Sí, sois un pueblo inmoderado!». Lo único que respondió su pueblo fue: «¡Expulsadles de la ciudad! ¡Son gente que se las da de puros!». Y les salvamos, a él y a su familia, salvo a su mujer, que fue de los que se rezagaron. E hicimos llover sobre ellos una lluvia: ¡Y mira cómo terminaron los pecadores!
es-->Y a Lot. Cuando dijo a su pueblo: «¿Cometéis deshonestidad a sabiendas? ¿Os llegáis a los hombres, por concupiscencia, en lugar de llegaros a las mujeres? Sí, sois gente ignorante». Lo único que respondió su pueblo fue: «¡Expulsad de la ciudad a la familia de Lot! Son gente que se las dan de puros». Les preservamos del castigo, a él y a su familia, salvo a su mujer. Determinamos que fuera de los que se rezagaran. E hicimos llover sobre ellos una lluvia. ¡Lluvia fatal para los que habían sido advertidos...!
es-->Los países de religión mayoritariamente islámica mantienen actualmente penas legales contra los homosexuales, como multas y prisión, llegándose incluso a la pena de muerte en 5 países: Irán, Mauritania, Arabia Saudita, Sudán y Yemen, y algunas partes de Nigeria y Somalia.[78]​
es-->Si la actitud del amor ha de formar parte, en algún momento, de las descripciones que siguen las tendencias de la ciencia experimental, deberá definirse de manera tal que pueda ser observada y cuantificada con cierta precisión. Baruch de Spinoza estableció una definición que puede cuadrar con los requerimientos de las ciencias humanas y sociales. Escribió al respecto: «El que imagina aquello que ama afectado de alegría o tristeza, también será afectado de alegría o tristeza; y uno y otro de estos afectos será mayor o menor en el amante, según uno y otro sea mayor o menor en la cosa amada».[79]​
es-->La definición de Spinoza, en la que la actitud del amor implica compartir alegrías y tristezas de otras personas, no difiere esencialmente de la definición bíblica del amor, ya que el mandamiento sugiere «compartir las alegrías y tristezas de los demás como si fuesen propias», tal el «amarás a tu prójimo como a ti mismo».
es-->No sólo esta definición se refiere a aspectos observables y contrastables con la realidad, sino que también presenta aspectos cuantificables, ya que indica que en mayor o menor medida serán compartidos los afectos, mientras mayor o menor sean la alegría o la tristeza asociada a la persona amada.
es-->De la definición mencionada Spinoza extrae algunas conclusiones inmediatas, tales como los sentimientos que surgen hacia un tercero. Según sus propias palabras: «Si imaginamos que alguien afecta de alegría a la cosa que amamos, seremos afectados de amor hacia él. Si imaginamos, por el contrario, que la afecta de tristeza, seremos, por el contrario, afectados también de odio contra él».[80]​
es-->Observamos, en esta expresión, que el odio aparece como una actitud opuesta al amor, como una tendencia a intercambiar (respecto del tercero mencionado) los papeles de tristeza y alegría como afectos compartidos.
es-->Para Leibniz, la felicidad es al hombre lo que la perfección es a los entes, y esa felicidad radica fundamentalmente en el amor. El amor a Dios, según el filósofo, debe ser con ternura, y debe tener el ardor combinado con la luz. Así pues, la perfección humana consiste en amor luminoso, un amor en el que se combina la ternura con la razón.[81]​
es-->Enfoque propio de disciplinas tales como biología y psicobiología, llamadas en su conjunto neurociencias, así como de la psicología y la antropología.
es-->El concepto de amor no es una noción técnica en biología sino un concepto del lenguaje ordinario que es polisémico (tiene muchos significados), por lo cual resulta difícil explicarlo en términos biológicos. Sin embargo, desde el punto de vista de la biología, lo que a veces se llama amor parece ser un medio para la supervivencia de los individuos y de la especie. Si la supervivencia es el fin biológico más importante, es lógico que la especie humana le confiera al amor un sentido muy elevado y trascendente (lo cual contribuye a la supervivencia). Desde la psicobiología sí tiene sentido encontrar las bases orgánicas de estados mentales concretos (como la sensación subjetiva de amor).
es-->Sin embargo, en la mayoría de las especies animales parecen existir expresiones de lo que se llama «amor» que no están directamente relacionadas con la supervivencia. Las relaciones físicas con individuos del mismo sexo (equivalentes a la homosexualidad en el ser humano) y las relaciones sexuales por placer, por ejemplo, no son exclusivas de la especie humana, y también se observan comportamientos altruistas por parte de individuos de una especie hacia los de otras especies (las relaciones milenarias entre el ser humano y el perro son un ejemplo). Algunos biólogos tratan de explicar dichos comportamientos en términos de cooperación para la supervivencia o de conductas excepcionales poco significativas. A partir de los años 1990 psiquiatras, antropólogos y biólogos (como Donatella Marazziti o Helen Fisher) han encontrado correlaciones importantes entre los niveles de hormonas como la serotonina, la dopamina y la oxitocina y los estados amorosos (atracción sexual, enamoramiento y amor estable).
es-->Los modelos biológicos del sexo tienden a contemplar el amor como un impulso de los mamíferos, tal como el hambre o la sed.[82]​ Helen Fisher, investigadora del Departamento de Antropología de la Universidad de Rutgers, Nueva Jersey, y experta mundial en este tema, describe la experiencia del amor en tres etapas parcialmente superpuestas: lujuria, atracción y apego, en cada una de las cuales se desarrolla un proceso cerebral distinto, aunque interconectado, y regulado hormonalmente.[83]​
es-->1) El impulso sexual indiscriminado o excitación sexual. Este proceso está regulado por la testosterona y el estrógeno en la mayoría de los mamíferos y casi exclusivamente por la testosterona en el ser humano, y es detectable neurológicamente en el córtex cingulado anterior. De breve duración (raramente dura más de unas pocas semanas o meses), su función es la búsqueda de pareja.
es-->2) La atracción sexual selectiva, pasión amorosa o enamoramiento, regulada por la dopamina en los circuitos cerebrales del placer. Esta segunda etapa es inusualmente prolongada en el ser humano frente a otras especies (hasta 18 meses). Consiste en un deseo más individualizado y romántico por un candidato específico para el apareamiento, que se desarrolla de forma independiente a la excitación sexual como un sentimiento de responsabilidad hacia la pareja. Recientes estudios en neurociencia han indicado que, a medida que las personas se enamoran, el cerebro secreta en crecientes cantidades una serie de sustancias químicas, incluyendo feromonas, dopamina, norepinefrina y serotonina, que actúan de forma similar a las anfetaminas, estimulando el centro del placer del cerebro y llevando a efectos colaterales tales como aumento del ritmo cardíaco, pérdida de apetito y sueño, y una intensa sensación de excitación. Las investigaciones han indicado que esta etapa generalmente termina al cabo de un año y medio a tres años.[84]​
es-->Otra sustancia que el cerebro libera en estado de enamoramiento es la feniletilamina, que actúa sobre el sistema límbico y provoca las sensaciones y sentimientos comunes en dicho estado, además de que es un precursor de la dopamina, de ahí que esta última también se encuentre en grandes cantidades. Una pequeña modificación química puede hacer que se transforme en un estimulante (anfetamina y metilfenidato) o un antidepresivo (bupropión y la venlafaxina). La feniletilamina puede encontrarse también en alimentos como el chocolate y quesos fermentados. Según Helen Fisher, es por ello que el amor romántico es —al igual que el chocolate— adictivo.
es-->La molécula proteínica conocida como factor de crecimiento nervioso (NGF) presenta niveles elevados cuando las personas se enamoran por primera vez, aunque ésta vuelve a sus niveles previos al cabo de un año.[85]​
es-->Tras las etapas de lujuria y atracción, es necesaria una tercera etapa para establecer relaciones a largo plazo:
es-->3) El cariño o apego, lazo afectivo de larga duración que permite la continuidad del vínculo entre la pareja, regulado por la oxitocina y la vasopresina, que también afectan al circuito cerebral del placer; su duración es indeterminada (puede prolongarse toda la vida). El apego implica la tolerancia de la pareja (o de los hijos) durante un tiempo suficiente como para criar a la prole hasta que ésta pueda valerse por sí misma. Se basa generalmente, por lo tanto, en responsabilidades tales como el matrimonio y los hijos, o bien en amistad mutua basada en aspectos como los intereses compartidos. Se ha relacionado con niveles de las sustancias químicas oxitocina y vasopresina a un nivel mayor del que se presenta en relaciones a corto plazo.[84]​
es-->El equilibrio de los tres procesos controla la biología reproductiva de muchas otras especies, por lo que se cree que su origen evolutivo es común. La etología interpreta que el amor humano evolucionó a partir del ritual de apareamiento o cortejo de los mamíferos (despliegue de energía, persecución obsesiva y protección posesiva de la pareja y agresividad hacia los potenciales rivales).[86]​
es-->En una entrevista con motivo de la publicación de su libro Por qué amamos, Fisher comenta que, en la elección de la pareja, y aunque aún no se conocen los motivos concretos, se sabe que intervienen de forma importante la cultura y el momento en que se produce dicha elección (por ejemplo, debemos estar dispuestos a enamorarnos). La gente tiende a enamorarse de alguien que tiene alrededor, próximo; nos enamoramos de personas que resultan misteriosas, que no se conocen bien. Los hombres se enamoran más deprisa que las mujeres, y tres de cada cuatro personas que se suicidan cuando una relación acaba son hombres. En cuanto a la pasión, ambos sexos presentan el mismo grado, pero en los hombres se ha descubierto una mayor actividad en una pequeña región cerebral asociada con la integración de los estímulos visuales. Es algo que tiene sentido, pues [en general] el negocio de la pornografía se apoya en los hombres y las mujeres intentan constantemente agradar con su aspecto a los hombres. La investigadora refiere que, durante millones de años, el hombre ha tenido que mirar bien a la mujer y tomarle la medida para ver si ella le daría un hijo saludable. En las mujeres, se ha descubierto una mayor actividad en una de tres áreas diferentes, asociadas con la memoria y la rememoración, y no simplemente con la capacidad de recordar. También durante millones de años, una mujer no podía mirar a un hombre y saber si podría ser un buen padre y un buen marido. Para saberlo, tenía que recordar. Y actualmente las mujeres recuerdan cosas como lo que había dicho su pareja el último día de San Valentín, o su comportamiento con anterioridad. Según Fisher, es un mecanismo de adaptación que las mujeres probablemente han poseído durante cuatro millones de años, para conseguir al hombre adecuado.[42]​[83]​
es-->El amor romántico es más fuerte que el impulso sexual. Promueve el apareo, pero, ante todo, promueve el deseo de consecución de un nexo emocional (queremos que nuestra pareja nos llame por teléfono, que se acuerde de nosotros, queremos agradarla y deseamos que ambos tengamos los mismos gustos). Una de las características principales del amor romántico, además del deseo de contacto sexual, es el de exclusividad sexual. Cuando tenemos relaciones sexuales con alguien y no lo amamos, no nos importa realmente si también las tiene con otros. Pero cuando nos enamoramos, pasamos a ser realmente posesivos, algo que en la comunidad científica llaman «vigilancia de la pareja». Por ello, el amor romántico es un arma de doble filo, pues, dependiendo del desenlace de la relación, puede derivar en una gran felicidad o una gran tristeza, la cual a su vez puede llevar, en casos extremos, al suicidio y/o al asesinato.[42]​[83]​
es-->El amor y el odio son muy parecidos, con la indiferencia como el opuesto de ambos. Normalmente hacemos ambas cosas: amamos y odiamos al mismo tiempo a la persona. De hecho, el amor y el odio tienen muchas cosas en común: cuando odiamos, concentramos nuestra atención tanto como cuando amamos; cuando amamos o cuando odiamos, nos obsesiona pensar en ello, tenemos una gran cantidad de energía y nos cuesta comer y dormir.[42]​[83]​
es-->Para presentar el punto de vista de la psicología sería preciso presentarlo de cada uno de sus enfoques/escuelas.
es-->Desde un punto de vista de la terapia cognitivo-conductual, el amor es un estado mental orgánico que crece o decrece dependiendo de cómo se retroalimente ese sentimiento en la relación de los que componen el núcleo amoroso. La retroalimentación depende de factores tales como el comportamiento de la persona amada, sus atributos involuntarios o las necesidades particulares de la persona que ama (deseo sexual, necesidad de compañía, voluntad inconsciente de ascensión social, aspiración constante de completitud, etc.).
es-->Desde la psicología cognitiva y psicología social, destacan las investigaciones efectuadas acerca del amor de Robert J. Sternberg, quien propuso la existencia de 3 componentes en su teoría triangular del amor:
es-->La intimidad, entendida como aquellos sentimientos dentro de una relación que promueven el acercamiento, el vínculo y la conexión.
es-->La pasión, como estado de intenso deseo de unión con el otro, como expresión de deseos y necesidades.
es-->La decisión o compromiso, la decisión de amar a otra persona y el compromiso por mantener ese amor.
es-->Estos tres componentes pueden relacionarse entre sí formando diferentes formas de amor: intimidad y pasión, pasión y compromiso, intimidad y compromiso, etc.
es-->Dentro de la psicología social, algunos autores proponen una serie de arquetipos amatorios, como por ejemplo John Lee: ludus, storge, eros, ágape, manía y pragma.
es-->Desde corrientes psicoanalíticas, para Erich Fromm el amor es un arte y, como tal, una acción voluntaria que se emprende y se aprende, no una pasión que se impone contra la voluntad de quien lo vive. El amor es, así, decisión, elección y actitud. Según Fromm, la mayoría de la gente identifica el amor con una sensación placiente. Él considera, en cambio, que es un arte, y que, en consecuencia, requiere esfuerzo y conocimiento. Desde su punto de vista, la mayoría de la gente cae en el error de que no hay nada que aprender sobre el amor, motivados, entre otras cosas, por considerar que el principal objetivo es ser amado y no amar, de modo que llegan a valorar aspectos superficiales como el éxito, el poder o el atractivo que causan confusión durante la etapa inicial del pretendido enamoramiento pero que dejan de ser influyentes cuando las personas dejan de ser desconocidas y se pierde la magia del misterio inicial.
es-->Así pues, recomienda proceder ante el amor de la misma forma que lo haríamos para aprender cualquier otro arte, como la música, la pintura, la carpintería o la medicina. Y distingue, como en todo proceso de aprendizaje, dos partes, una teórica y otra práctica.[29]​
es-->Desde el punto de vista de la psicología humanista, la definición de amor más delimitada que aporta el humanismo es la de Carl Rogers, también considerada por Abraham Maslow: «amor significa ser plenamente comprendido y profundamente aceptado por alguien». Según Maslow, «el amor implica una sana y afectuosa relación entre dos personas». Partiendo de estas dos definiciones, la necesidad de amor se basa en algo que incita a las personas a ser aceptadas y adheridas a una relación. Dice Maslow: «La necesidad de amor implica darlo y recibirlo […], por tanto, debemos comprenderlo; ser capaces de crearlo, detectarlo, difundirlo; de otro modo, el mundo quedará encadenado a la hostilidad y a las sombras». Para Maslow, así como para muchos teóricos de la psicología, las necesidades o pulsiones-deseo descritas por el psicoanálisis nunca llegan a una satisfacción completa o son acompañadas por el surgimiento de una nueva necesidad, por lo cual siempre permanecerá en la persona un estado de requerimiento.[87]​
es-->Cuando en las relaciones sentimentales existe cierto grado de egoísmo, se producen situaciones en las que uno de los amantes, por miedo al fracaso, por la inseguridad emocional que le produce su falta de autoestima, polariza su egoísmo en una muestra extrema y desesperada de altruismo, que a modo de ultimátum se manifiesta por un amor desmedido sin pensar en los límites de uno mismo, pudiendo incluso llegar a poner en peligro su propia existencia o la de la otra persona por estar experimentando un estado polarizado de obsesión. En este caso, el que ama, desea y anhela el bien y la felicidad del ser amado, y lo hace por encima de todas las cosas, pero, en última instancia, esperando obtener algo a cambio. Desde el punto de vista del budismo, es un amor con apego. En estos casos, el dar sin recibir a cambio, el sacrificarse y anteponer las necesidades del ser amado por encima de las de uno mismo, suele considerarse, para las personas que no han cultivado suficientemente el altruismo, es decir, para las personas que no son capaces de amar sin apego, una antesala al desequilibrio emocional, ya que la persona objeto de la obsesión no tiene por qué responder tal como se había premeditado; o puede incluso que, bajo una actitud igualmente egoísta, no agradezca el esfuerzo y exija aún más. No obstante, algunos confunden esa polarización con amor «verdadero» o «sano», y exigen de la otra persona el mismo comportamiento, pudiendo manifestar frustración extrema y, como salida a dicha frustración, violencia. Por los resultados evidentes en las noticias a diario, observamos una creciente tendencia a la violencia en el noviazgo, en la que los psicólogos actuales apuntan a esta patología de obsesión polarizada (desencadenada por una baja autoestima) como principal desencadenante de estos conflictos.
es-->Recuérdese que cada uno de los enfoques en psicología tienen su propia aportación a este respecto, congruente con su propio marco teórico.
es-->Si bien el amor está fundado en capacidades y necesidades biológicas así como el placer sexual y el instinto de reproducción, tiene también una historia cultural. A veces se atribuye su invención a alguna tradición particular (a los sufis, a los trovadores,[88]​ al cristianismo, al movimiento romántico, etcétera), pero los vestigios arqueológicos de todas las civilizaciones confirman la existencia de afecto hacia los familiares, la pareja, los niños, los coterráneos, entre otros, por lo cual las interpretaciones que postulan que el amor en general es una construcción cultural específica no parecen fundadas.
es-->Desde el punto de vista cultural, el amor sexual se ha manifestado históricamente hacia las personas del sexo opuesto como hacia aquellas del mismo sexo. Para los griegos y durante el Renacimiento, los ideales de belleza eran encarnados en particular por la mujer y por los adolescentes de sexo masculino.
es-->La palabra española «amor» puede tener múltiples significados, aunque relacionados, distintos entre sí dependiendo del contexto. A menudo, otros idiomas usan diferentes palabras para expresar algunos de los variados conceptos. Las diferencias culturales al conceptualizar el amor hacen aún más difícil establecer una definición universal.[89]​ En la cultura maya no existía la palabra amor para con los hijos. En piamontés no existe la palabra amor.[90]​
es-->Incluso tras todo este tiempoEl Sol nunca dice a la Tierra «estás en deuda conmigo».¡Observa lo que ocurre con un Amor como ese!
es-->—Ilumina todo el Cielo.
es-->Rumi, Hafiz y Sa'di son iconos de la pasión y el amor en la cultura y el lenguaje persas. La palabra persa para el amor es eshgh, que deriva de la árabe ishq. En la cultura persa, todo es abarcado por el amor y todo es por amor, empezando por el amor a los amigos y a la familia, a los maridos y esposas, y llegando eventualmente al amor divino, que constituye la meta última de la vida. Hace alrededor de siete siglos, Sa'di escribió:
es-->Los hijos de Adán son miembros de un cuerpoHabiendo sido creados de una sola esencia.Cuando la calamidad del tiempo aflige a un miembroLos otros miembros no pueden continuar su descanso.Si no tienes compasión por los problemas de otrosNo mereces ser llamado por el nombre de «hombre».
es-->En el idioma chino y la cultura china contemporáneos, se usan varios términos o palabras raíz para el concepto de amor:
es-->Ai (愛) se usa como verbo (p. ej., wo ai ni, «te amo») o como nombre, especialmente en aiqing (愛情), «amor» o «romance». En la China continental, y desde 1949, airen (愛人, originalmente «amante», o, más literalmente, «persona de amor») es la palabra dominante para «esposo» (habiendo sido desenfatizados originalmente los términos separados para «esposa» y «marido»); la palabra tuvo una vez una connotación negativa, que permanece, entre otros lugares, en Taiwán.
es-->Lian (戀) generalmente no se usa de forma aislada, sino como parte de términos tales como «estar enamorado» (談戀愛, tan lian'ai —que también contiene ai), «amante» (戀人, lianren) u «homosexualidad» (同性戀, tongxinglian). En el confucianismo, lian es un amor benevolente y virtuoso que deberían buscar todos los seres humanos, y refleja una vida moral. El filósofo chino Mozi desarrolló el concepto de ai (愛) como reacción al lian confucianista. Ai, en el mohismo, es un amor universal hacia todos los seres, no sólo hacia los amigos o familia, sin consideración de la reciprocidad. La extravagancia y la guerra ofensiva son hostiles hacia ai. Aunque el pensamiento de Mozi tuvo influencia, el término confucianista lian es el que la mayoría de los chinos usan para el amor.
es-->Qing (情), que comúnmente significa «sentimiento» o «emoción», generalmente indica «amor» en varios términos. Está contenido en la palabra aiqing (愛情). Qingren (情人) es un término usado con el significado de «amante».
es-->Gănqíng (感情) es el «sentimiento» de relación, vagamente similar a la empatía. Una persona expresará amor construyendo buen gănqíng, conseguido por medio de ayuda o trabajo prestados a otras personas y apego emocional hacia otra persona o hacia cualquier otra cosa.
es-->Yuanfen (緣份) es la conexión de destinos vinculados. Una relación significativa es generalmente concebida como dependiente de un fuerte yuanfen. Consiste en buena suerte a la hora de hacer un descubrimiento afortunado e inesperado. Conceptos similares en español son: «Estaban hechos el uno para el otro», o el «destino».
es-->Zaolian (simplificado: 早恋, tradicional: 早戀, pinyin: zǎoliàn), literalmente, «amor temprano», es un término contemporáneo usado frecuentemente para los sentimientos románticos o el apego entre niños o adolescentes. Describe tanto la relación entre novio y novia adolescentes como el enamoramiento de la adolescencia temprana o la niñez. El concepto indica en esencia la creencia prevalente en la cultura china contemporánea consistente en que, debido a la demanda de los estudios (derivada sobre todo del sistema educativo altamente competitivo de China), los jóvenes no crean apego romántico y por lo tanto ponen en peligro sus oportunidades de éxito futuro. Han aparecido informes en periódicos y otros medios chinos que detallan la prevalencia del fenómeno, los peligros observados en los estudiantes y los temores de sus padres.
es-->Existe una leyenda china que se dice tiene miles de años de antigüedad, que, con diversas variaciones, cuenta la historia de un joven arriero llamado Niulang (chino: 牛郎; pinyin: niú láng; literalmente «[el] arriero», o «pastor de vacas», Altair) se encontró en su camino con siete hadas bañándose en un lago. Alentado por su travieso compañero el buey, hurtó sus ropas, esperando después a ver qué sucedía. Las hermanas hadas, para recuperarlas, eligieron a la hermana menor y más bella, de nombre Zhinü (chino: 織女; pinyin: zhī nǚ; literalmente, «[la] tejedora», Vega). Ella lo hace, pero, como Niulang la había visto desnuda, se ve obligada a aceptar la propuesta de matrimonio de Niulang, que se había enamorado de ella (en otras versiones de la historia, Zhinü había escapado del aburrido cielo para divertirse y fue ella la que se enamoró de Niulang). Eran felices juntos, pero, en el reino de las hadas, la «Diosa del Cielo» (que en algunas versiones es la madre de Zhinü), tras enterarse de la impura unión, tomó su alfiler y formó un ancho río para separar a los dos amantes para siempre, creando así la Vía Láctea, que separa a las estrellas Altair y Vega. (En otra versión, la Diosa obliga al hada a volver a su tarea de tejer coloridas nubes en el cielo, ya que no podía hacerlo mientras estuviese casada con un mortal).
es-->Zhinü permanece para siempre a un lado del río, hilando tristemente su telar, mientras Niulang la ve desde lejos, y cuida de sus dos hijos (las dos estrellas que lo rodean, Beta Aquilae y Gamma Aquilae, o, por sus nombres en chino, Hè Gu 1 y Hè Gu 3).
es-->No obstante, una vez al año, todas las urracas del mundo, aves místicas en la cultura china, se compadecen de ellos y vuelan hasta el cielo para formar un puente (chino: 鵲橋, Que Qiao, «el puente de las urracas») sobre la estrella Deneb en la constelación del Cisne, para que los amantes puedan reunirse por una sola noche, en la séptima noche de la séptima luna, el día del amor en China.
es-->A finales del verano, las estrellas Altair y Vega se elevan en el cielo nocturno, y los chinos cuentan y celebran esta leyenda durante el Qi xi (chino: 七夕 pinyin: qī xī, «la noche de los sietes»).
es-->La historia presenta algunas variaciones más:
es-->La Diosa del Cielo, por compasión al ser tocada por el amor que existía entre ambos, decidió unirlos una vez el séptimo día del séptimo mes lunar.
es-->El Emperador del cielo, padre del arriero, fue quien los separó para que se concentrasen en su trabajo en lugar de en el romance.
es-->La estrella Deneb es un hada que actúa como carabina cuando los amantes se encuentran en el puente de las urracas.
es-->Los amantes pueden reunirse una vez al mes.
es-->Durante la noche de los sietes, en cierto momento las dos estrellas Altair y Vega se reúnen realmente a un mismo lado de la Vía Láctea.
es-->En el budismo japonés, ai (愛) es un amor de cariño pasional, y un deseo fundamental. Puede desarrollarse hacia el egoísmo o el altruismo y hacia la iluminación.
es-->Amae (甘え), una palabra japonesa que significa «dependencia indulgente», es parte de la cultura de la educación de los hijos en Japón. Se espera de las madres japonesas que abracen y mimen a sus hijos, y se espera de los hijos que recompensen a sus madres aferrándose a ellas y sirviéndolas. Algunos sociólogos han sugerido que las interacciones sociales de los japoneses en la vida de adultos se modelan en el amae entre madre e hijo.
es-->El idioma griego distingue varios sentidos diferentes en los que se usa la palabra «amor». Por ejemplo, el griego antiguo presenta las palabras agape, philia, eros, storge y xenia. Sin embargo, con el griego (al igual que con muchos otros idiomas) ha sido históricamente difícil separar totalmente los significados de estas palabras. Al mismo tiempo, el texto en koiné de la Biblia contiene ejemplos del verbo agapó utilizado con el mismo significado que phileo.
es-->Agape (ἀγάπη agápē) generalmente se refiere a un tipo ideal de amor «puro», más que a la atracción física sugerida por eros. No obstante, hay algunos ejemplos de agape usados con el significado de eros. También se ha traducido como «amor del alma».
es-->Eros (ἔρως érōs) es un amor pasional, con deseo sensual y duradero. La palabra griega erota significa enamorado. Platón creó su propia definición. Aunque eros se siente inicialmente por una persona, con la contemplación se convierte en una apreciación de la belleza que existe dentro de esa persona, o incluso llega a ser la apreciación de la belleza en sí misma. Eros ayuda al alma a recordar el conocimiento de la belleza y contribuye a la comprensión de la verdad espiritual. Los amantes y los filósofos están todos inspirados para la búsqueda de la verdad por medio de eros. Algunas traducciones lo muestran como «amor del cuerpo».
es-->Philia (φιλία philía), un amor virtuoso desapasionado, fue un concepto desarrollado por Aristóteles. Incluye la lealtad a los amigos, la familia y la comunidad, y requiere virtud, igualdad, y familiaridad. Philia está motivado por razones prácticas; una o ambas partes se benefician de la relación. También puede significar «amor de la mente».
es-->Storge (στοργή storgē) es un afecto natural, como aquel que sienten los padres por sus hijos.
es-->Xenia (ξενία xenía), hospitalidad, era una práctica extremadamente importante en la Antigua Grecia. Era una amistad casi ritualizada formada entre un anfitrión y su huésped, quienes podían haber sido previamente desconocidos. El anfitrión alimentaba y proporcionaba alojamiento al huésped, de quien se esperaba recompensa únicamente con gratitud. La importancia de este amor puede verse a través de toda la mitología griega, en particular, en la Ilíada y la Odisea de Homero.
es-->En la mitología griega, eran tres los sexos: lo masculino era en un principio descendiente del sol; lo femenino, de la tierra, y lo que participaba de ambos, de la luna. Estos tres sexos, y su manera de avanzar, eran, precisamente como la luna, circulares. Así pues, eran terribles por su fuerza y su vigor y tenían gran arrogancia, hasta el punto de que atentaron contra los dioses. Ante esta situación, Zeus y los demás dioses deliberaron, y se encontraron ante un dilema, ya que no podían matarlos o hacer desaparecer su raza fulminándolos con el rayo como a los gigantes —porque entonces desaparecerían los honores y sacrificios que los hombres les tributaban—, ni permitir que siguieran siendo altaneros.
es-->Tras mucho pensarlo, al fin Zeus tuvo una idea y dijo: «Me parece que tengo una estratagema para que continúen existiendo estos seres y al mismo tiempo dejen de ser insolentes, al hacerse más débiles. Ahora mismo —continuó— voy a cortarlos en dos a cada uno, y así serán al mismo tiempo más débiles y más útiles para nosotros, al haber aumentado su número». Así pues, Zeus llevó a cabo su plan, y una vez que la naturaleza de estos seres quedó cortada en dos, cada parte empezó a echar de menos a su mitad, a reunirse con ella y rodearla con sus brazos, a abrazarse la una con la otra anhelando ser una sola por naturaleza. Desde entonces, el amor de unos a otros es innato en los hombres y mujeres y aglutinador de la antigua naturaleza, y trata de hacer un solo individuo de dos. Por eso, cuando se tropiezan con aquella verdadera mitad de sí mismos, sienten un maravilloso impacto de amistad, de afinidad y de amor, de manera que no están dispuestos a separarse.
es-->De El Banquete de Platón.
es-->En árabe, que es una lengua muy rica en palabras sinónimas, existen numerosos sinónimos de la palabra «amor». Entre ellos, se encuentran: «Al Hobb» («el amor») , «Al Mawadda» («el afecto»), «Al ‘ishq» (una muy fuerte pasión), «Al Hayâm» (amor que llega a la locura), «As·sabâba» (ternura de la pasión), «Ash·shawq» (inclinación por amor hacia otra persona o algo concreto), «Al-Hawâ» (amor que domina el corazón), «Ash·shahwa» (amor mezclado con deseo), «Al Waÿd» (amor muy intenso), «Al-Gharâm» (amor que domina a la persona, y la pasión que tortura), «At-tîm» (llegar a la locura de tanto amor, amor que domina completamente a la persona).[58]​
es-->El amor se manifiesta en diversos círculos: El amor hacia Al·lâh, El amor hacia el Mensajero de Al∙lâh, El amor del musulmán hacia el musulmán, El amor dentro de la familia musulmana, El amor hacia el no musulmán, El cariño entre el gobernante y el gobernado.[58]​
es-->En un tercer círculo figura el amor entre los musulmanes; este amor se cristaliza en el intercambio de sentimientos de afecto sincero y en traducirlo en dichos y hechos, en lo malo y en lo bueno. Es una relación íntima y estrecha en la que los corazones y los espíritus se sienten atraídos unos hacia otros; de este modo, se consigue la satisfacción y el goce del amor entre las partes que están en armonía.[58]​
es-->Ibn Al Qayyem enumera los tipos de amor en el marco social diciendo: «Entre ellos figura el amor que se manifiesta en un acuerdo acerca de una manera, una religión, una doctrina o un método, una proximidad, un producto o un objetivo. Existe también el amor con el objetivo de lograr algún beneficio del amado, de su potencia, riqueza, educación o para satisfacer un deseo. Este tipo es efímero y acaba una vez que se haya logrado el objetivo. El que te ama para lograr una meta, te abandona al conseguirla. El amor armonioso o el que emana de un acuerdo entre dos personas es duradero y sólo acaba cuando ocurre algo que ponga fin a este amor. El amor de gran afecto es: “una aprobación espiritual y una combinación entre las almas”».[91]​
es-->En turco, la palabra «amor» aparece con varios significados. Una persona puede amar a un dios, a una persona, a sus padres, o a la familia. Pero esa persona sólo puede «amar» (aşk) a una persona del sexo opuesto. Los turcos usaban esta palabra solamente para sus amores en un sentido romántico o sexual, que indicasen un enorme encaprichamiento. Esta palabra también es común para las lenguas turcas, tales como el azerbaiyano (eşq) y el kazajo (ғашық).
es-->El idioma latín tiene varios verbos diferentes que se corresponden con la palabra española «amor».
es-->Amāre es la palabra básica para «amar», y aún lo es en el italiano actual. Los romanos la usaban tanto en un sentido afectivo como en un sentido romántico o sexual. De este verbo deriva amans —un amante, amador, «amante profesional», generalmente con la noción accesoria de lujuria— y amica, «novia», palabra generalmente usada de forma eufemística para una prostituta. El nombre correspondiente es amor, que también se usaba en la forma plural para indicar enredos amorosos o aventuras sexuales. La misma raíz produce además amicus —«amigo»— y amicitia, «amistad» (por lo general basados en el provecho mutuo, y correspondientes a veces más exactamente a «deuda» o «influencia»). Cicerón escribió un tratado llamado Sobre la amistad (De amicitia), que discute la noción hasta cierta profundidad. Ovidio escribió una guía para las relaciones amorosas llamada Ars Amatoria que trata en profundidad el amor desde las relaciones extramaritales hasta los padres sobreprotectores.
es-->En latín a veces se usaba amāre con el sentido que damos en español a «gustar». Esta noción, no obstante, se expresa de forma mucho más generalizada con placere o delectāre, que son de uso más coloquial, siendo el último usado frecuentemente en la poesía amorosa de Catulo.
es-->Diligere a menudo presenta la noción de «tener afecto por», «estimar», y raramente, si no nunca, se usaba para el amor romántico. Esta palabra sería apropiada para describir la amistad de dos hombres. El nombre correspondiente, diligentia, sin embargo, tiene el significado de «diligencia» o «dedicación», y tiene cierta superposición semántica con el verbo.
es-->Observare es un sinónimo de diligere; este verbo y su correspondiente nombre, observantia, denotan a menudo «estima» o «afecto».
es-->Caritas se corresponde con el griego agape (empatía, altruismo), y se usó en traducciones de la Biblia cristiana al latín con el significado de «amor caritativo»; este significado, no obstante, no se ha hallado en la literatura clásica romana pagana. Como resultado de la combinación con una palabra griega, no existe el verbo correspondiente.
es-->Cupiditas se corresponde con el término griego eros (deseo sexual).
es-->Algunas terminologías vulgares en español, como por ejemplo filito, originado de filia, generan jerarquías de seriedad o duración de la pareja.
es-->En la cultura anglosajona la palabra «amor» (love) presenta, al igual que en español, múltiples significados. Pero, a todos aquellos que existen en el mundo hispanohablante, los angloparlantes añaden un significado adicional, más relacionado con el simple gusto por algo: I love dancing (literalmente, «amo el baile») corresponde en español a «me encanta bailar» o «me gusta mucho bailar»; he's a great actor, I love him (literalmente, «es un gran actor, le amo») corresponde a «es un gran actor, me encanta», o «es un gran actor, me gusta mucho».[92]​ El psicoanálisis sitúa al amor como un comportamiento narcisista, de tal modo que el amor interpersonal es realmente amor a uno mismo en última instancia. En Estados Unidos, el psicoanálisis ha ocupado durante el siglo XX un lugar preponderante en el ámbito de la psicología, aunque actualmente existe una dura pugna entre sus detractores y defensores, que se conoce como the Freud wars. La cultura del psicoanálisis se ha extendido ampliamente por otros países, y actualmente los dos países que más se resisten a la extinción de esta corriente psicológica son Francia y Argentina.[93]​
es-->Agustín García Calvo (1984), El amor y los 2 sexos. Del tiempo de amor y olvido. Editorial Lucina, Zamora. (2.ª ed. 1991).
es-->José Pedro Manglano Castellary (2007). El amor y otras idioteces. Editorial Planeta. ISBN 978-84-08-07567-7. 
es-->Carmen Martín Gaite Usos amorosos de la postguerra española. 1ª edición, 1987. 7ª edición, 1988. Anagrama. Barcelona. ISBN 84-339-0085-4.
es-->Publio Ovidio Nasón (1995). Amores; Arte de amar; Sobre la cosmética del rostro femenino; Remedios contra el amor. Madrid: Editorial Gredos. ISBN 978-84-249-1392-2. 
es-->C. S. Lewis (2007). Los cuatro amores. Rialp. ISBN 978-84-321-2749-6. 
es-->Octavio Paz (1993). La llama doble - Amor y erotismo. Seix Barral. ISBN 978-968-6005-80-6. 
es-->Conchita Ramón Delgado. Diccionario del amor. 1936. Gráficas "RECORT", Barcelona.
es--> Wikimedia Commons alberga contenido multimedia sobre AmorCommons.
es--> Wikiquote alberga frases célebres de o sobre Amor. Wikiquote
es--> Wikcionario tiene definiciones y otra información sobre amor.Wikcionario
de-->Liebe (über mhd. liep, „Gutes, Angenehmes, Wertes“ von idg. *leubh- gern, lieb haben, begehren) ist eine Bezeichnung für stärkste Zuneigung und Wertschätzung.
de-->Nach engerem und verbreitetem Verständnis ist Liebe ein starkes Gefühl, mit der Haltung inniger und tiefer Verbundenheit zu einer Person (oder Personengruppe), die den Zweck oder den Nutzen einer zwischenmenschlichen Beziehung übersteigt und sich in der Regel durch eine entgegenkommende tätige Zuwendung zum anderen ausdrückt. Das Gefühl der Liebe kann unabhängig davon entstehen, ob es erwidert wird oder nicht. Hierbei wird zunächst nicht unterschieden, ob es sich um eine tiefe Zuneigung innerhalb eines Familienverbundes (Elternliebe, Geschwisterliebe) oder um eine Geistesverwandtschaft handelt (Freundesliebe, Partnerschaft) oder aber um ein körperliches Begehren gegenüber einem anderen Menschen (Eros). Dieses Begehren ist als körperliche Liebe eng mit der Sexualität verbunden, die jedoch nicht unbedingt auch ausgelebt zu werden braucht (vgl. platonische Liebe).
de-->Liebe wird von der zeitlich begrenzten Phase der Verliebtheit unterschieden.
de-->Ausgehend von dieser ersten Bedeutung wurde der Begriff in der Umgangssprache und in der Tradition schon immer auch im übertragenen Sinne verwendet und steht dann allgemein für die stärkste Form der Hinwendung zu anderen Lebewesen, Dingen, Tätigkeiten oder Ideen. Diese allgemeine Interpretation versteht Liebe also zugleich als Metapher für den Ausdruck tiefer Wertschätzung.
de-->Kulturgeschichtlich und historisch ist „Liebe“ ein schillernder Begriff, der nicht nur in der deutschen Sprache in vielfältigen Kontexten und in den unterschiedlichsten Konnotationen verwendet wird. Das Phänomen wurde in den verschiedenen Epochen, Kulturen und Gesellschaften unterschiedlich aufgefasst und erlebt. Jede Zeit und jeder soziale Verband setzt je eigene Verhaltensregeln für den Umgang mit der Liebe. Daher können die Bedeutungsebenen zwischen der sinnlichen Empfindung, dem Gefühl und der ethischen Grundhaltung Liebe wechseln.
de-->Ebenso vielschichtig wie die Bedeutungen der Liebe sind die Bedeutungen der Antonyme. Im Hinblick auf die emotionale Anziehung zwischen Personen ist es der Hass. Im Sinne der Abwesenheit von Liebe kann aber auch die Gleichgültigkeit als Antagonismus angesehen werden. Absoluter Mangel an Liebe führt beim Kind zu Hospitalismus. Fehlentwicklungen der Liebesfähigkeit sind im Sinne des „reinen“ Liebesbegriffes das Besitzdenken (Eifersucht) oder verschiedene Formen der freiwilligen Abhängigkeit bzw. Aufgabe der Autonomie bis hin zur Hörigkeit.
de-->Liebe wird häufig als eine auf den freien Willen gegründete Beziehung zwischen zwei Personen gesehen, die ihren Wert nicht im Besitz des adressierten Objekts findet, sondern sich im dialogischen Raum zwischen den Liebenden entfaltet. Die Liebenden erkennen einander in ihrer Existenz wechselseitig an und fördern sich „zueinander strebend“ gegenseitig.
de-->Liebe wird teilweise als anomisches und entgrenzendes Gegenmodell zu den Beschränkungen, Anforderungen, Funktionalisierungen und Ökonomisierungen der menschlichen Alltags- und Arbeitswelt aufgefasst. Liebe ist kein bewusster oder rationaler Entschluss der Liebenden; gleichwohl ist sie nicht irrational.
de-->Im Sinne des Diskurses der Anerkennung (zum Beispiel John Rawls, Axel Honneth) enthält Liebe die von Hegel betonte „Idee der wechselseitigen Anerkennung“, was ihr ein moralisches Fundament verleiht. Liebe ist daher für Honneth neben dem Recht und der Solidarität eines der drei „Muster intersubjektiver Anerkennung“. Liebe zeichnet sich demnach in Freundschaften und in auf Liebe gegründeten Beziehungen durch emotionale Zugewandtheit und Wohlwollen aus. Das praktische Erleben von Liebe ermöglicht Selbstvertrauen und ist identitätsstiftend. Das heißt, dass im Sozialisationsprozess Forderungen an Identitätsbildung geltend gemacht werden. Zu deren Erfüllung leistet Liebe einen Beitrag, indem einer Person positive Eigenschaften zugeordnet werden und die Persönlichkeit Zustimmung erfährt. Somit bestärkt die durch Liebe erfahrene soziale Anerkennung die Herausbildung einer intakten Identität. Darüber hinaus unterscheidet beziehungsweise erweitert die moralische Grundierung Liebe auch vom reinen Trieb.
de-->Die abendländische Auffassung von Liebe wird von der Dreiteilung der antiken Terminologie geprägt. In der Antike wurden drei Begriffe verwendet, die unterschiedliche Formen von Liebe bezeichneten:
de-->Éros – bezeichnet die sinnlich-erotische Liebe, das Begehren des geliebten Objekts, den Wunsch nach Geliebt-Werden, die Leidenschaft;
de-->Philía – bezeichnet die Freundesliebe, Liebe auf Gegenseitigkeit, die gegenseitige Anerkennung und das gegenseitige Verstehen;
de-->Agápe – bezeichnet die selbstlose und fördernde Liebe, auch die Nächstenliebe und die Feindesliebe, die das Wohl des Anderen im Blick hat.
de-->Die genauen Bedeutungen und Schwerpunkte der Begriffe haben sich im Laufe der Zeit verändert, sodass – im Gegensatz zum ursprünglich Gemeinten – unter „platonischer Liebe“ heute ein rein geistig-seelisches Prinzip ohne körperliche Beteiligung und Besitzwunsch verstanden wird, dem das leiblich-erotische Modell von geschlechtlicher Liebe schroff gegenübergestellt wird.
de-->Im Laufe der Zeiten wurden diese Grundformen der Liebe immer wieder differenziert. So bezeichnet man manchmal die spielerisch-sexuelle Liebe als „ludus“, die besitzergreifende Liebe als „mania“ und die auf Vernunftgründen basierende Liebe als „pragma“. Ein besonderes Liebesverhältnis stellt in theistischen Religionen auch jenes zwischen der erbarmenden Liebe Gottes zu den Menschen und der verehrenden Liebe der Menschen zu Gott dar (Oberbegriff für beides ist Gottesliebe).
de-->In Anlehnung an diese Dreiteilung kann man die Ausprägungen des Phänomens der Liebe in Empfindung, Gefühl und Haltung unterscheiden:
de-->Unter Liebesempfindungen versteht man die primär sinnlichen Liebesgefühle, insbesondere die Verliebtheit und die sexuelle Anziehung. Sie stehen in der Regel in Verbindung mit den beiden anderen Formen der Liebe, können aber auch durch die Wahrnehmung eines fremden Körpers, das heißt durch visuelle, olfaktorische oder taktile Reize ausgelöst werden oder ganz einfach durch den empfundenen Mangel an einem geliebten Gegenüber. Die Liebesempfindung steht in enger Verbindung mit der Sexualität, das heißt sexuellen Wünschen, Bedürfnissen und Handlungen (zum Beispiel dem Geschlechtsverkehr, auch als „Liebe machen“ bezeichnet).
de-->Unter Liebesgefühlen allgemein versteht man ein komplexes, vielfältiges Spektrum unterschiedlicher Empfindungen und Haltungen gegenüber verschiedenen Arten möglichen Liebesobjekte, in denen die sinnlich-erotische Komponente nur sekundär von Bedeutung ist. Sie führen zu einer Hinwendung und Zuwendung zum Anderen, dem Wertschätzung, Aufmerksamkeit und Zärtlichkeit geschenkt werden.
de-->Sympathie, Freundschaft, Fürsorge und emotionale Liebe sind Erscheinungen, in denen Liebesgefühle eine große Rolle spielen. Ebenso können die kontemplative Liebe (zum Beispiel zur Natur), die aktive sorgende Liebe um den Nächsten (Karitas), die religiöse bzw. mystische Liebe und das Mitleid hierzu gerechnet werden.
de-->Selbstliebe: Selbstliebe wird in der Regel als immer vorhanden angesehen; von einigen auch als die Voraussetzung zur Fähigkeit zum Lieben und zur Nächstenliebe angesehen, wobei nach Auffassung Erich Fromms (1900–1980) Selbstsucht Selbsthass bedeute. Selbstsucht äußere sich in der Liebe durch besitzgieriges Interesse. Fromm behauptete weiterhin, dass zu starke Selbstlosigkeit keine Tugend sei, sondern ein Symptom, durch das unbeabsichtigter Schaden entstehen könne. Körperliche Selbstliebe wird auch als Masturbation ausgelebt, welche die sexuelle Entwicklung fördere. Überhöhte Eigenliebe oder pathologische Eigenliebe wird als Narzissmus bezeichnet.
de-->Partnerliebe: Die geschlechtliche Liebe kann in gegengeschlechtliche (Heterosexualität) und gleichgeschlechtliche Liebe (Homosexualität) unterschieden werden und findet oft in Liebesbeziehungen Ausdruck, für die in heutigen europäischen Kulturen das Ideal der Partnerschaft, vermischt mit dem ehemals höfischen Ideal der romantischen Liebe, betont wird. In der Gesellschaft hat die eheliche Liebe häufig eine institutionell bedeutsame Rolle und nimmt oftmals Exklusivität für sich in Anspruch (siehe Monogamie). Nicht auf exklusiven Zweierbeziehungen beruhende Liebesmodelle (Polygamie) spielen in außereuropäischen Kulturen und in den letzten Jahrzehnten in seltenen Fällen auch im Westen („Polyamorie“), z. B. in subkulturellen Lebensformen, eine Rolle.
de-->Familiäre Liebe: Neben der partnerschaftlichen Liebe sind insbesondere die Liebe zwischen (engen) Verwandten (Vaterliebe, Mutterliebe, Kindesliebe) und die Freundesliebe in menschlichen Gemeinschaften von größter Bedeutung.
de-->Nächstenliebe: Die Nächstenliebe gilt im Sinne von Religion und Ethik primär den Bedürftigen, während die Philanthropie sie zur allgemeinen Menschenliebe ausdehnt (vgl. Menschlichkeit). Die Feindesliebe ist eine im Neuen Testament auf Feinde bezogene Nächstenliebe, die oft als christliche Besonderheit gilt, aber auch in anderen Religionen vorkommt – so zum Beispiel im hawaiischen Hoʻoponopono, bei dem sie sich als „den anderen loslassen“ ausprägt. Ein weiteres Konzept ist das Konzept der Fernstenliebe.
de-->Objekt- und Ideenliebe: Insbesondere in jüngerer Zeit ins Zentrum gesellschaftlicher Begriffe gerückt sind in westlichen Kulturen auch Tierliebe oder die Liebe zur Natur. In der weitesten sprachlichen Auslegung „liebt“ man darüber hinaus seine Hobbys oder Leidenschaften und kann diese dann auch als Liebhaberei oder Vorlieben bezeichnen. Auch Ideale können demnach geliebt werden, etwa durch den Begriff „Freiheitsliebe“ dargestellt, aber auch Zugehörigkeiten wie Vaterlandsliebe (Patriotismus).
de-->Gottesliebe: Eine besondere Rolle nimmt die Gottesliebe ein, in ihrer allgemeinen Form die in verschiedenen (keinesfalls allen) Religionen vorausgesetzte Liebe Gottes zu seiner Schöpfung und insbesondere dem Menschen. Der gleiche Begriff bezeichnet auch die Liebe zu einem Gott.
de-->„Objektlose Liebe“: Liebe als Grundhaltung benötigt für christliche Mystiker wie Meister Eckhart kein Objekt. Liebe wird hier als bedingungsloses Öffnen verstanden. Der Philosoph und Metaphysiker Jean Émile Charon bezeichnet diese „universale“ Liebe als „Finalität der Evolution“ und „Selbsttranszendenz des Universums“.
de-->Liebe, insbesondere Verliebtheit („Verliebtsein“) kann sich nonverbal, etwa durch Blicke, Mimik, Unruhe oder Körperhaltung ausdrücken. Beruht die Liebe auf Gegenseitigkeit, drückt der Mensch sie durch Zärtlichkeiten, insbesondere Küssen und Berührungen aus. Die körperliche Vereinigung kann dabei als intimste Ausdrucksform der Liebe dienen. Verbale Ausdrucksformen sind in erster Linie Bezeichnungen der oder des Geliebten, meistens in Form von Komplimenten und Koseworten bzw. Kosenamen wie „Liebling“ oder „Schatz“.
de-->Besondere, konventionelle Formen sind die „Liebeserklärung“ oder der Liebesbrief, die auch in der Literatur eine besondere Würdigung erfuhren. Auch Rituale wie die Verlobung oder Symbole wie der Verlobungsring gehören hierzu.
de-->Das Ideal einer „Liebe als Verehrung“ unter Ausschluss einer konkreten körperlichen Beziehung gehört eher in die (Literatur-) Geschichte und fand dort eine besondere Form in der sogenannten „hohen Minne“, ein Begriff, den Walther von der Vogelweide als Gegenbegriff zur „nideren minne“, also der körperlich erfüllten Minne, verwendet. In dieser poetischen Form der Liebe bleibt die „frouwe“ unerreichbar.
de-->In ausgebildeten polytheistischen Religionen, die sich von einer Umwandlung vieler Lokalgottheiten zu einem ‚arbeitsteiligen‘ Pantheon fortentwickelt hatten, wurden oft besondere (meist weibliche) Gottheiten der Liebe verehrt. So gab es im antiken Griechenland die Göttin Aphrodite und ihren Sohn Eros, bei den Römern die Göttin Venus und ihren Sohn Amor.
de-->Die monotheistischen Religionen haben ausgehend von der Gottesliebe ausgefeilte Theologien der Liebe entwickelt (Siehe auch die davon abgeleiteten Vorstellungen von Nächstenliebe und Karitas). Die Allliebe Gottes ist eine seiner Eigenschaften; da aber auch Zorn oder Eifersucht zu seinen Eigenschaften zählen, hat die Theologie hier ein komplexes Arbeitsfeld. Im griechischen Neuen Testament ist Liebe die erste Frucht des Heiligen Geistes. Die Kirche unterscheidet nach Platon zwischen Agape und Eros (siehe oben). Papst Benedikt XVI. widmete seine erste Enzyklika Deus caritas est, dem Thema Liebe.
de-->Selbst in der negativen Theologie, wie auch in der Mystik, wird als einzige Aussage über das Unsagbare in der Regel dennoch die Feststellung Gott ist die Liebe anerkannt; vgl. dazu auch die natürliche Theologie.
de-->Der Begriff Liebe ist in der Biologie nicht definiert und damit keine biologische Kategorie. Allgemein ist es schwierig, emotionale Prozesse mit naturwissenschaftlicher Methodik zu bearbeiten, zumal die zu Grunde liegende Biochemie noch nicht ausreichend bekannt ist. Gesichert sind beim Menschen lediglich folgende Erkenntnisse:
de-->Neueren Untersuchungen des Gehirnstroms und Studien zufolge bewirkt Verliebtheit in Bereichen des menschlichen Gehirns, die auch für Triebe zuständig sind, die höchste Aktivität, was darauf schließen lässt, dass „das Gefühl“, das gemeinhin als Liebe (im Sinne von Verliebtheit) bezeichnet wird, in seinem biochemischen Korrelat einen starken Zusammenhang mit dem biologischen Trieb aufweist.
de-->Die mitunter sehr lange anhaltenden Wirkungen der Verliebtheit (Limerenz) deuten aber auch auf neuroendokrine Prozesse hin, die dem Phänomen zugrunde liegen. Das würde sich auch in das Entstehungsfeld einfügen, das in der Sexualität zu suchen ist, die ihrerseits maßgeblich der neuroendokrinen Steuerung des Zwischenhirns unterliegt. Dabei spielen nicht zuletzt die endogenen Opiate des Hypophysenzwischenlappens eine Rolle.
de-->Verliebt sich ein Mensch, so sorgen verschiedene Botenstoffe für Euphorie (Dopamin), Aufregung (Adrenalin), rauschartige Glücksgefühle und tiefes Wohlbefinden (Endorphin und Cortisol) sowie erhöhte sexuelle Lust (Testosteron sinkt bei Männern, steigt bei Frauen). Umgekehrt können Momente, in denen man nicht mit der geliebten Person zusammen ist, als sehr schmerzlich bis hin zur Verzweiflung empfunden werden. Auch Sexualduftstoffe (Pheromone) werden vermehrt abgegeben. Hingegen sinkt der Serotoninspiegel stark ab, wodurch der Zustand der Verliebtheit in diesem Punkt eine Ähnlichkeit mit vielen psychischen Krankheiten aufweist. Das trägt dazu bei, dass Verliebte sich zeitweise in einem Zustand der „Unzurechnungsfähigkeit“ befinden können, sich dabei zu irrationalen Handlungen hinreißen lassen und Hemmschwellen abbauen. Nach einiger Zeit (wenige Monate) gewöhnt sich der Körper an diese Dosen und ganz allmählich (laut WHO maximal nach 24 bis 36 Monaten) beendet das Gehirn diesen sensorischen „Rauschzustand“.
de-->Das vertiefte Gefühl der Liebe ist aus evolutionsbiologischer Sicht möglicherweise im Zusammenhang mit der Sexualität entstanden, wobei die Liebe es ist, die die Partnerwahl und damit die Paarbeziehung über längere Zeiträume stabilisiert. Es sind zwar bei vielen Tierarten monogame Paarbeziehungen bekannt (zum Beispiel auch bei den Graugänsen von Konrad Lorenz), aber ob diese Tiere dabei so etwas wie Liebe empfinden, ist eine unbeantwortete Frage.
de-->Im Rahmen des Konzepts der biologischen Determiniertheit entsteht Liebe zwingend aus bestimmten körperlichen Reaktionen.
de-->Die Psychologie beschäftigt sich mit den zahlreichen Spielarten der Liebe und des Liebesentzuges.
de-->Nach Auffassung der Evolutionspsychologen werden Frauen und Männer bei der Partnerwahl von Vorlieben regiert, die sich über Millionen von Jahren von unseren Vorfahren auf uns weitervererbt haben. Diese „Steinzeit-Psyche“ soll Frauen auf starke oder statushohe Beschützer-Typen reagieren lassen; Männer dagegen auf junge, hübsche Frauen. Schönheit gelte bei beiden Geschlechtern offenbar als Indiz für „gesunde Gene“, wie auch Humanethologen bestätigen. In diesem Zusammenhang wurde auch vielfach untersucht, was „Schönheit“ in diesem Zusammenhang bedeutet, welche körperlichen Merkmale für beide Geschlechter als attraktiv gelten („Durchschnittlichkeit“ als Ideal).
de-->Die Psychiatrie befasst sich unter dem medizinischen Aspekt mit dem Phänomen. So wird zum Beispiel die Psychopathologie des „Liebeswahns“ im Zusammenhang mit paranoischen Vorstellungen diagnostiziert (vgl. Wahnsinn).
de-->Es liegen in der Soziologie mindestens vier substantielle, thematisch einander eher ergänzende Ansätze zur Liebe vor. Sie betonen mehr oder weniger die liebebezogenen Aspekte von Kommunikation Interaktion und Semantik. Demnach wird Liebe (1) als „Emotion“ (zum Beispiel bei Jürgen Gerhards), (2) als „Kulturmuster“ (zum Beispiel bei Niklas Luhmann), (3) als „Intimsystem“ (bei Frank Becker/Elke Reinhardt-Becker, Jürgen Fuchs) und (4) „nicht-kognitive Form kommunikativer Praxis“ (bei Günter Burkart, Cornelia Koppetsch) definiert.
de-->Liebe wird unter anderem als ein gesellschaftlich wirkendes Symbol für Interaktionen betrachtet (vgl. Symbolischer Interaktionismus) und auf seine soziale Funktion hin untersucht. Die Soziologie untersucht zahlreiche Einzelformen der Liebe, etwa die „romantische Liebe“, die „Liebe“ im Bürgertum, die „Mutterliebe“, die „Vaterlandsliebe“ (oft als Ideologie), die Bezüge zwischen Liebe, Gewalt und Macht und andere mehr. Unter den zeitgenössischen Soziologen behandelt zum Beispiel Bálint Balla eingehend die Liebe in seiner Soziologie der Knappheit; Horst Herrmann untersucht die (geschlechtsspezifischen) Zusammenhänge von Liebe und Gewalt sowie die gesellschaftlich wirkenden Modelle heutiger Liebesbeziehungen. Auch hat die Soziologie angrenzende soziale Bräuche wie die Koketterie (Georg Simmel) oder den Flirt untersucht.
de-->Die Systemtheorie nahm eine einschneidende Begriffsverengung vor, indem sie Liebe neu als eine „gesellschaftliche Semantik“ bzw. als Code des Miteinander-Umgehens definierte. So formulierte Niklas Luhmann in Liebe als Passion (1982) romantische Liebe als ein Phänomen der Moderne, welches seine Grundlegung vor allem im Bürgertum des 18. Jahrhunderts erfährt.
de-->Liebe fungiert – nach Luhmann – in der heutigen funktional ausdifferenzierten Gesellschaft in erster Linie als „symbolisch generalisiertes Kommunikationsmedium“, das unwahrscheinliche Kommunikation wahrscheinlich machen soll. Die Gesellschaft differenziert sich immer stärker in einzelne Teilbereiche. Jedes Individuum ist nicht mehr nur in einem Bereich, zum Beispiel der Familie verwurzelt, sondern in vielen Teilbereichen, etwa Freizeit oder Beruf. Auch ist es immer auch nur zu einem Teil verortet und bewegt sich ständig zwischen verschiedenen Bereichen hin und her. Aufgrund dieser kommunikativen „Polykontextualität“ erschwere sich die identitätsbildende Interaktion.
de-->Dem Einzelnen fällt es vor diesem Hintergrund zunehmend schwerer, sich selbst zu bestimmen. Hinzu kommt, dass diese Individualität und Identität im kommunikativen Austausch mit anderen bestätigt werden muss. Diese „höchstpersönliche“ Kommunikation nimmt in einer derart ausdifferenzierten Gesellschaft aber ständig ab, denn zum einen wird durch die Vielzahl an Rollen in den beschriebenen Teilbereichen (zum Beispiel als Tochter, Sekretärin, Freizeitseglerin etc.) dort auch nur unpersönliche Kommunikation erfahren und zum anderen begreift sich der Mensch als Individuum, also etwas Besonderes, Einzigartiges, anders als die Anderen. Angesichts dieser Entwicklung ist es nicht nur schwierig, miteinander in Kontakt zu treten, es wird auch schwierig, einander überhaupt noch zu verstehen bzw. die Motivation zu finden, sich auf einen doch so Besonderen, Anderen einzulassen. Genau dieses Problem zu bewältigen ist – in dieser Theorie – Aufgabe der Liebe. Der Systemtheoretiker Peter Fuchs definiert Liebe daher als „wechselseitige Komplettannahme im Modus der Höchstrelevanz“. Liebe als Kommunikationsmedium motiviert dazu, sich dem Anderen unter Ausblendung von Idiosynkrasien in seiner „Ganzheit“ zu nähern und nicht unter der verengenden Perspektive des jeweiligen Sozialsystems (zum Beispiel als Freizeitsegler). Durch diese Komplettannahme entsteht eine wechselseitige Bestätigung des „Selbst-Seins“ und des jeweiligen „Weltbezugs“.
de-->Liebe, bzw. genauer das Intimsystem, das im Medium Liebe operiert, ist eine Vorform des Sozialsystems Familie, dem grundlegende gesellschaftliche Funktionen zukommen (nämlich Reproduktion und Sozialisation). Des Mediums Liebe bedarf es, da unwahrscheinliche Ereignisse (zwei Menschen begegnen sich unter Millionen anderen und begründen und stabilisieren ein Zusammenleben) erwartbar gemacht werden müssen. Liebe ist also wie Geld oder Macht ein sogenanntes Steuerungsmedium, das die Chance auf das Eintreffen unwahrscheinlicher Sinnzumutungen steigert. Überraschend ist dabei jedoch, dass Intimsysteme auf dem paradoxen, komplexen und sehr täuschungsempfindlichen Medium Liebe basieren.
de-->Wanders Deutsches Sprichwörter-Lexikon bietet zu Liebe, Liebeli, Liebeln, Lieben, Liebende usw. ca. tausend Sprichwörter. Auch in der medizinischen Fachliteratur erscheinen die Liebe und deren Folgen (etwa der „Liebeskummer“) seit der Antike.
de-->Wesentlich ist im sozialen Kontext die Unterscheidung zwischen der einseitigen und der gegenseitigen Liebe. Erstere hat ihren Spezialfall in der im Volksmund sogenannten unglücklichen Liebe (vgl. Liebeskummer).
de-->Viele Bezeichnungen für Fachgebiete sind, ebenso wie eine Reihe anderer Begriffe, auf dem Präfix phil- aufgebaut, das für Liebe steht. Hierzu zählen insbesondere die Philosophie (ursprünglich: Liebe zur Weisheit) und die Philologie (ursprünglich: Liebe zu Sprachen). Die Philatelie sei stellvertretend für andere Sammelleidenschaften genannt, der Name Philipp („Philhippos“, verschiedene Schreibweisen) bedeutet „Pferdeliebhaber“.
de-->Einen christlichen Standpunkt innerhalb der Existenzphilosophie vertritt Gabriel Marcel in Sein und Haben: Der Mensch existiere ursprünglich nicht in der Abgrenzung, sondern in der Teilhabe am Mitmenschen und göttlichen Sein. In dieser Seinsteilhabe verwirkliche sich die Liebe, die sich vorbehaltlos öffne, wenn der Mensch dessen in innerlicher Hingabe gewahr werde.
de-->Seit Harry Harlow (siehe Literatur: Psychologie) seinen Bericht über die Untersuchungen an Affenjungen veröffentlicht hat ("Das Wesen der Liebe"), lässt sich diskutieren, ob Liebe auch von Tieren empfunden und erlebt werden kann. Sein Konzept von der Liebe ist allerdings eher positivistisch orientiert, denn Liebe sei ein Gefühl der Haut, indem sie sich eben vorwiegend über die Berührung zweier Lebewesen realisiere.
de-->Minnesang bzw. Minnedichtung reflektierten programmatisch unerfüllte Liebe, priesen die Angebetete oder schilderten erotische Erlebnisse (ab Mitte des 13. Jahrhunderts).
de-->Die Schäferdichtung war eine beliebte Literaturgattung der europäischen Renaissance und des Barock in der Tradition der Bukolik. Sie entwickelte sich ursprünglich aus der Schäferei, einer höfischen Rollendichtung, die durch die Verschmelzung von lyrisch-musikalischen Elementen, Prosa, Dialogen und kunstvollen Versen gekennzeichnet war und das Hirtenleben idealisierte. Ein beliebtes Thema ist der Bericht von einer spröden, abweisenden Geliebten, der ein Liebender gegenübersteht, der ihr völlig ausgeliefert ist, sich nach ihr verzehrt und, unter Umständen sogar krankhaft leidet. Gefühle wie unerfüllte Liebe, Lobgesänge auf eine Schäferin, Wehmut in Anbetracht einer schöneren Vergangenheit oder einer verlorenen Heimat zählen zu den typischen Gegenständen der künstlerischen Darstellung.
de-->Empathie
de-->Freie Liebe
de-->Metta
de-->Idealisierung
de-->Glaube, Liebe, Hoffnung (als theologische Tugenden)
de-->Marsilio Ficino: Über die Liebe oder Platons Gastmahl. 3. Auflage. Meiner, Hamburg 1994, ISBN 3-7873-1189-0.
de-->Erich Fromm: Die Kunst des Liebens. 59. Auflage. Ullstein, München 2001, ISBN 3-612-26745-0.
de-->Josef Pieper: Über die Liebe. 7. Auflage. Kösel, München 1992, ISBN 3-466-40131-3.
de-->Werner Schüßler / Marc Röbel (Hrsg.): LIEBE – mehr als ein Gefühl. Philosophie – Theologie – Einzelwissenschaften. Schöningh, Paderborn 2016, ISBN 978-3-506-78513-8.
de-->Platon: Das Gastmahl. Reclam, Ditzingen 1986, ISBN 3-15-000927-8.
de-->Max Scheler: Wesen und Formen der Sympathie. Bouvier, Bonn 1999, ISBN 3-416-02910-0.
de-->C.S. Lewis: Was man Liebe nennt: Zuneigung, Freundschaft, Eros, Agape. 7. Auflage. Brunnen, Basel 2004, ISBN 3-7655-3266-5.
de-->Stendhal: Über die Liebe. 6. Auflage. Insel, Frankfurt am Main 1989, ISBN 3-458-31824-0.
de-->José Ortega y Gasset: Über die Liebe. Meditationen. Dtv, München 1993 u.ö., ISBN 3-423-19025-6.
de-->Paulus von Tarsus: Hohelied der Liebe (1. Korinther 13).
de-->Roland Barthes: Fragmente einer Sprache der Liebe. Suhrkamp, Frankfurt am Main 2005, ISBN 3-518-38086-9. Zitate von Roland Barthes.
de-->Kai Buchholz (Hrsg.): Liebe. Ein philosophisches Lesebuch. Goldmann Verlag, München 2007, ISBN 978-3-442-07756-4.
de-->Harry Frankfurt: The Reasons of Love. Princeton University Press, 2004.
de-->dt. Übers.: Gründe der Liebe. Suhrkamp, Frankfurt am Main 2005.
de-->Axel Honneth: Liebe und Moral. Zum moralischen Gehalt affektiver Bindungen. In: Axel Honneth: Das Andere der Gerechtigkeit. Aufsätze zur praktischen Philosophie. Suhrkamp, Frankfurt am Main 2000, ISBN 3-518-29091-6, S. 216 ff.
de-->Maik Hosang: Liebe in Zeiten des Klimawandels. Phänomen Verlag, Hamburg 2008, ISBN 978-3-933321-72-5.
de-->Yudit Kornberg Greenberg: Encyclopedia of Love in World Religions. ABC-Clio, 2007, ISBN 978-1-85109-980-1.
de-->Martha Nussbaum: Konstruktion der Liebe, des Begehrens und der Fürsorge. Drei philosophische Aufsätze. Reclam, Stuttgart 2002.
de-->Wilhelm Schmid: Die Liebe neu erfinden. Suhrkamp, Frankfurt am Main 2010, ISBN 978-3-518-42203-8. (Rezension: dradio.de, Deutschlandfunk, Andruck, 1. November 2010, Annette Brüggemann: Zwischen Endlichkeit und Unendlichkeit.)
de-->Stascha Rohmer, Liebe – Zukunft einer Emotion, Freiburg/München: Karl Alber 2008. ISBN 978-3-495-48317-6
de-->Karl Grammer: Signale der Liebe. Dtv, München 1995, ISBN 3-423-30498-7.
de-->Robert A. Johnson: Traumvorstellung der Liebe. Der Irrtum des Abendlandes. 3. Auflage. Walter, Olten u. a. 1988, ISBN 3-530-40391-1.
de-->Peter Lauster: Die Liebe. Psychologie eines Phänomens. 35. Auflage. Rowohlt, Reinbek bei Hamburg 2004, ISBN 3-499-17677-7.
de-->Harry Harlow: Das Wesen der Liebe. In: Otto M. Ewert (Hrsg.): Entwicklungspsychologie. Band 1. Kiepenheuer & Witsch, Köln 1972, S. 129–135.
de-->Nadine Bauers: Psychologische Aspekte der Liebe. Neuere Befunde. jmb Verlag, Hannover 2016, ISBN 978-3-944342-86-3.
de-->Georges Bataille: Die Erotik. Matthes & Seitz, München 1994, ISBN 3-88221-253-5.
de-->Ulrich Beck, Elisabeth Beck-Gernsheim: Das ganz normale Chaos der Liebe. Suhrkamp, Frankfurt am Main 1990
de-->Ulrich Beck, Elisabeth Beck-Gernsheim: Fernliebe. Lebensformen im globalen Zeitalter. Suhrkamp, Frankfurt am Main 2011.
de-->Christoph Egen: Zur Sozio- und Psychogenese der romantischen Liebesvorstellung in westeuropäischen Gesellschaften. Cuvillier, Göttingen 2009, ISBN 978-3-86955-199-9.
de-->Werner Faulstich (Hrsg.): Liebe 2000. Konzepte von Liebe in der populären Kultur heute. Wissenschaftler-Verlag, Bardowick 2002, ISBN 3-89153-034-X.
de-->Peter Fuchs: Liebe, Sex und solche Sachen. Zur Konstruktion moderner Intimsysteme. UVK, Konstanz 1999, ISBN 3-87940-663-4.
de-->Anthony Giddens: The transformation of intimacy. Sexuality, love, and eroticism in modern societies. Polity Press, Cambridge 2001, ISBN 0-7456-1012-9, ISBN 0-7456-1239-3. (Nachdruck, 1. Auflage. 1992)
de-->Doris Guth, Heide Hammer (Hrsg.): Love me or leave me. Liebeskonstrukte in der Populärkultur. Campus Verlag, Frankfurt am Main/ New York 2009.
de-->Kornelia Hahn, Günter Burkart (Hrsg.): Liebe am Ende des 20. Jahrhunderts. Studien zur Soziologie intimer Beziehungen. Leske + Budrich, Opladen 1998.
de-->Karl Otto Hondrich: Liebe in den Zeiten der Weltgesellschaft. Suhrkamp, Frankfurt am Main 2004.
de-->Eva Illouz: Der Konsum der Romantik. Liebe und die kulturellen Widersprüche des Kapitalismus. Suhrkamp, Frankfurt am Main 2007, ISBN 978-3-518-29458-1. (orig. 1997)
de-->Eva Illouz: Warum Liebe weh tut. Eine soziologische Erklärung. Suhrkamp, Frankfurt am Main 2011.
de-->Jean-Claude Kaufmann: Der Morgen danach. Wie eine Liebesgeschichte beginnt. UVK, Konstanz 2004. (im frz. Orig. 2002)
de-->Svjetlan Lacko Vidulić: Lieben heute. Praesens Verlag, Wien 2007, ISBN 978-3-7069-0389-9.
de-->Annemarie Leibbrand-Wettley, Werner Leibbrand: Formen des Eros. Kultur- und Geistesgeschichte der Liebe. (= Orbis academicus. Sonderbände 3/1-2). 2 Bände. Alber, Freiburg/ München 1972, ISBN 3-495-47256-8.
de-->Karl Lenz: Soziologie der Zweierbeziehung. Eine Einführung. 2. Auflage. Westdeutscher Verlag, Wiesbaden 2003, ISBN 3-531-33348-8.
de-->Niklas Luhmann: Liebe als Passion. Zur Codierung von Intimität. 7. Auflage. Suhrkamp, Frankfurt am Main 2003, ISBN 3-518-28724-9.
de-->Niklas Luhmann: Liebe. Eine Übung. Hrsg. von André Kieserling. Suhrkamp, Frankfurt am Main 2008.
de-->Regina Mahlmann: Was verstehst du unter Liebe? Ideale und Konflikte von der Frühromantik bis heute. Wiss. Buchgesellschaft/ Primus Verlag, Darmstadt 2003, ISBN 3-89678-468-4.
de-->Yvonne Niekrenz, Dirk Villányi (Hrsg.): LiebesErklärungen. Intimbeziehungen aus soziologischer Perspektive. VS Verlag, Wiesbaden 2008.
de-->Paul Ridder: Sonette gegen Liebesschmerz. Bibliotherapie in der Medizingeschichte. Verlag für Gesundheitswissenschaften, Greven 2008, ISBN 978-3-9807065-6-8.
de-->Christian Schuldt: Der Code des Herzens. Liebe und Sex in den Zeiten maximaler Möglichkeiten. Eichborn, Frankfurt am Main 2004, ISBN 3-8218-5592-4.
de-->Kurt Starke: Nichts als die reine Liebe. Beziehungsbiographien und Sexualität im sozialen und psychologischen Wandel. Pabst, Lengerich u. a. 2005
de-->Bennett Helm: Eintrag in Edward N. Zalta (Hrsg.): Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.Vorlage:SEP/Wartung/Parameter 1 und Parameter 3 und nicht Parameter 2
de-->Alexander Moseley: Philosophy of Love. In: Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
de-->Denis de Rougemont: Love, in: Dictionary of the History of Ideas
it-->Con la parola amore si può intendere un'ampia varietà di sentimenti ed atteggiamenti differenti, che possono spaziare da una forma più generale di affetto ("amo mia madre; amo mio figlio") sino a riferirsi ad un forte sentimento che si esprime in attrazione interpersonale ed attaccamento, una dedizione appassionata tra persone oppure, nel suo significato esteso, l'inclinazione profonda nei confronti di qualche cosa.
it-->Può anche essere una virtù umana che rappresenta la gentilezza e la compassione, la vicinanza disinteressata, la fedeltà e la preoccupazione benevola nei confronti di altri esseri viventi, ma anche il desiderare il bene di altre persone.
it-->Gli antichi Greci hanno individuato quattro forme primarie di amore: quello parentale-familiare (storge), l'amicizia (philia), il desiderio erotico ma anche romantico (eros), infine l'amore più prettamente spirituale (agape, il quale può giungere fino all'auto-annientamento o kenosis); gli autori moderni hanno distinto anche altre varietà di amore romantico, mentre le tradizioni non occidentali contengono varianti o simbiosi di questi stati.
it-->Una tal ampiezza di usi e significati, in combinazione con la complessità dei sentimenti che coinvolgono i soggetti che amano, possono rendere particolarmente difficoltoso definire in modo univoco e certo l'amore, rispetto ad altri stati emotivi.
it-->Nell'ambito della psicologia esso consiste in un rapporto duale basato su uno scambio emotivo generato dal bisogno fisiologico della gratificazione sessuale e dal bisogno psicologico dello scambio affettivo. L'amore nelle sue varie forme agisce come un importante facilitatore nella relazione interpersonale e, data la sua importanza psicologica centrale, è uno dei temi più comuni trattati nelle arti creative; può infine essere inteso anche come un modo per tenere uniti gli esseri umani contro le minacce provenienti dall'ambiente esterno e per aiutare la riproduzione umana e la conseguente continuazione della specie.
it-->Il termine può acquisire ulteriori precisazioni o significati negli ambiti filosofico, religioso o nelle arti.
it-->Il termine italiano "amore" entra nella lingua italiana a partire dal XIII secolo, derivando dal termine latino amore(m) (nominativo amor), a sua volta derivato dal latino amare. Il termine amare, il quale risulta connesso con il latino amma (mamma), o anche amita (zia), può avere quindi la sua possibile origine dal linguaggio infantile.
it-->Un'altra possibile origine fa derivare il lemma latino dal protoitalico *ama e quindi dal protoindoeuropeo *h3mh3, col significato di "prendere, tenere", evolvendo in "prendere la mano di", quindi legarsi in amicizia (da qui anche il latino amicus, amica, amasius); quindi corrispondente al sanscrito amánti, amīṣi, col medesimo significato, e all'antico avestico əma.
it-->All'interno delle relazioni che l'individuo intrattiene col proprio ambiente, l'amore si può classificare attraverso differenti manifestazioni:
it-->Amore di sé - il sano amor proprio. Appare come condizione di autostima, ma non deve esser confuso col narcisismo che sfocia nell'egocentrismo. Per il buddhismo, che qualifica l'ego come un'illusione della nostra mente, il vero amore, ossia la compassione, esiste solo quando viene diretto verso un'altra persona, non a se stessi. Per la psicoanalisi invece, che si trova completamente opposta al buddhismo, l'ego viene definito come l'unica realtà, l'amore è sempre auto-personale, che può svilupparsi in una forma sana o malsana a seconda dei casi.
it-->Amore incondizionato - amore altruistico e compassionevole, professato senza aspettarsi nulla in contraccambio. Corrisponde all'amore spirituale predicato dalle varie religioni.
it-->Amore filiale e fraterno - tra discendenti e antenati (familiare, parentale).
it-->Amicizia - sentimento che nasce dalla necessità provata dagli esseri umani di socializzare tra loro.
it-->Amore romantico - un sentimento che in un certo grado idealizza la persona amata, soggetta all'aspettativa amorosa.
it-->Amore sessuale - prodotto dal desiderio sessuale verso l'altro
it-->Amore platonico - concetto filosofico che innalza l'amore alla contemplazione della bellezza, alla conoscenza pura e disinteressata. Poi successivamente interpretato dai Neoplatonici del '500 come amore filosofico nei confronti di una persona.
it-->Amore per la Natura - coinvolge un sentimento di protezione verso il mondo vegetale ed animale.
it-->Amore per qualcosa di astratto o inanimato - un oggetto fisico, un'idea, ma anche un obiettivo ideale (amor di patria o patriottismo) e può essere associato con l'eroismo; in quest'ultimo caso costituisce una forma di altruismo nei confronti del proprio gruppo
it-->Amore per Dio - devozione, si basa sulla fede religiosa.
it-->Amore universale - spiritualità in senso lato, corrispondente all'esperienza data dal misticismo (estasi, illuminazione, nirvana).
it-->Per quanto in generale il concetto di amore non sia uno dei più frequentati dalla filosofia, esso riveste un'importanza notevole nella sua storia. Il primo pensatore a porre esplicitamente il concetto è Empedocle, nel suo vedere il divenire determinato dalla dialettica amore/odio, visti come fattori cosmologici primari: le due forze opposte dell'Essere, con l'idea di unità e fusione che sottende al suo concetto di amore.
it-->Platone trasferisce invece il concetto dalla cosmologia alla metafisica, come aspirazione e tensione verso il divino Bene da cui dipendono le Idee come suoi attributi. Questo mondo divino (iperuranio) come mondo delle Idee è l'oggetto cognitivo delle anime individuali, frammenti dell'Anima del mondo scesi nell'umano. Il tema dell'amore viene presentato, in chiave più umana, nel simposio, nel fedro e anche nello ione.
it-->Nel Simposio l'amore viene immaginato come desiderio nei confronti dell'Unità originaria, questo nell'intervento di Aristofane; in quello di Socrate invece amore è detto figlio di Penia-privazione e Poros-risorsa: amare è desiderare ciò che non abbiamo, a differenza del bisogno è una radicale insoddisfazione. Ma è anche ricco di risorse, fecondo non nel possesso bensì nella creatività e pertanto fonte di novità imprevedibile; cerca infine la contemplazione nella bellezza assoluta.
it-->Aristotele concettualizza la differenza tra eros e philia; la philia ideale è quando non ci uniamo da interesse o piacere, ma come ricerca del bene degli altri senza attenderci nulla in cambio; il filosofo introduce inoltre l'idea di conflitto tra amore di sé e amore per gli altri. Si risolve tuttavia l'opposizione nell'armonia, con l'altro che si fa alter ego, un altro io.
it-->Questa impostazione si coniuga poi con la teologia cristiana, trovandovi rispondenza e riformulazione, avendo nel platonico Agostino di Ippona il suo estensore, ma con una inversione di direzione, poiché se in Platone l'amore è movimento dall'uomo a Dio, per Sant'Agostino è da Dio all'uomo. Tommaso d'Aquino, che segue Aristotele, definisce l'amore come "volere il bene di un altro" (Summa I-II, 26, 4).
it-->In Spinoza l'amore torna a essere movimento "verso Dio", come unità-totalità perfetta e compiuta, da parte delle menti umane quali parti "pensanti" verso Dio quale suprema "Cosa Pensante". Gottfried Leibniz ci dice che l'amore è "essere deliziati dalla felicità di un altro".
it-->Il concetto di amore è stato affrontato in modo particolare in filosofia dal 1700 a oggi.
it-->Arthur Schopenhauer, influenzato e ispirato dal buddhismo, definisce la compassione essenza di ogni amore e solidarietà, amore e solidarietà che si spiegano alla luce del dolore della vita. (Die welt, 1, par. 66-67); giunge così ad un pessimismo metafisico, in quanto proprio la passione amorosa ci attira dentro un ciclo cosmico costantemente ripetuto in una spirale di sofferenza. Shopenhauer conclude dicendo che l'amore è in definitiva un'illusione della voluntas-Volontà (essenza di tutte le cose che sono) la quale cerca di perpetuarsi attraverso la riproduzione.
it-->Adam Smith nella Theory of Moral Sentiments (III, 1) pone la simpatia come struttura di tutti i sentimenti morali.
it-->Hegel sostiene che l'amore supera il diritto, è qualcosa che va oltre ed è più importante. È pertanto auspicabile uno Stato, società e famiglia centrate sull'amore piuttosto che sulle leggi. L'amore non ha i confini del diritto, fatto di opposizioni e bilanciamenti tra poteri e continue distinzioni; l'amore è antitesi a tutte le opposizioni e a tutte le molteplicità. È nell'essere la rinuncia a sé stessi per un altro che porta all'identificazione del soggetto in un'altra persona, e, ugualmente nel pensiero, al fatto che il soggetto perde la coscienza di sé e diventa cosciente di questa identità, di essere tutt'uno e di non poter vivere senza l'altro:
it-->Dopo l'opposizione, l'amore è sintesi tra due persone. Realizza un'identità non in senso stretto (con perdita della diversità) nell'essere e nella coscienza, ma un'identità dell'identico e del diverso, in cui il soggetto e la mia coscienza non muoiono, restando come tolte. Il soggetto è consapevole, in modo permanente, avverte in continuazione, la nuova unità con la persona amata.
it-->L'amore è il grande escluso delle analisi filosofiche e psicologiche che si occupano del comportamento umano. In parte perché il termine stesso è inflazionato o contaminato da molteplici significati. Ma che parola dovremmo usare per definire quel sentimento di forte empatia che vuole il bene dell'altro senza anteporre il proprio? Se escludiamo tutti gli altri significati, questo sentimento è la ragione principe del comportamento morale per molte persone. Solo chi non lo vive può non tenerne conto nel fare e nel valutare leggi che devono regolamentare il comportamento umano nella società. La paura delle conseguenze del proprio agire è fondamentale solo per chi non ama nel senso testé definito. La mera paura delle conseguenze del proprio agire è già di per sé il segno di un handicap morale. I deterrenti non possono costituire l'unica forma di educazione morale nella società. Se uno crede di essere nel giusto non ha paura delle conseguenze; al limite, se ne guarda, per comprensibili ragioni di opportunità. Ma un Gandhi non sarebbe stato possibile se nell'animo umano l'ultima frontiera dell'agire morale fosse la paura. Allo stesso modo, i kamikaze non possono essere fermati con meri strumenti polizieschi. Non possiamo dunque contare solo sui freni inibitori della paura. La stessa presenza di un superego è un handicap morale, perché l'amore non è, da esso, soltanto diminuito, o indebolito, è addirittura sostituito con valori che antepongono l'Io all'Altro, valori che non hanno in sé nulla di morale, di autoresponsabile. Anche se può sembrare più rassicurante, per la sua prudenza programmata e per la sua incapacità di azzardo, un pilota automatico, senza la supervisione di un pilota reale, è un azzardo puro e semplice. La capacità di agire nella realtà esige la libertà e la responsabilità.
it-->Pur essendoci dei caratteri comuni, la maggior parte delle reazioni o delle pulsioni amorose sono soggettive e variano da individuo a individuo; tuttavia ci sarebbero, secondo la maggior parte degli psicologi e degli scienziati, tre fasi principali nell'amore fra esseri umani: infatuazione (o innamoramento), attrazione e attaccamento, composte da vari elementi e stadi..
it-->Generalmente, l'amore comincia nella fase dell'"infatuazione", forte nella passione ma debole negli altri elementi. Il primo sprone di questa fase sarebbe l'istinto sessuale. L'aspetto fisico, e altri fattori, giocherebbero infatti un ruolo decisivo nel selezionare possibili compagni o compagne. In questa fase l'amore è puramente materiale: si apprezza il/la compagno/a nella sua apparenza corporea, nella sua pura esteriorità. Quello che inizia con l'infatuazione può svilupparsi in uno dei tipi d'amore più pieni.
it-->Con il passare del tempo gli altri elementi (affetto, attaccamento) possono crescere e la passione fisica può diminuire d'importanza, mantenendo però quell'equilibrio alla base della relazione. In questa fase, detta "attrazione", si giudica il partner al di là di come appare, si valutano diversi fattori come la sua cultura, i suoi valori. In questa fase, quindi, si apprezza il/la compagno/a nella sua pura interiorità.
it-->Nella fase dell'"attaccamento", la persona si concentra sul singolo compagno e la fedeltà assume importanza. Ormai si apprezza il/la compagno/a in sé e per sé, in modo pieno e totale, forti delle due fasi precedenti ma ora consapevoli di tutto il proprio percorso interiore. Ora non si amano più caratteristiche determinate, siano esse materiali o spirituali, ma l'uomo/la donna in quanto tali.
it-->Lo psicologo di origine tedesca Erich Fromm ha sostenuto nel suo libro L'arte di amare che l'amore non è solo un sentimento, ma è anche composto da azioni e che in realtà il cosiddetto "sentimento d'amore" è superficiale rispetto al proprio impegno di amare attraverso una serie di azioni amorevoli nel corso del tempo. In questo senso, Fromm ha dichiarato che l'amore non è in definitiva un sentimento per tutti, ma piuttosto è un impegno e un'adesione, un insieme di azioni amorevoli rivolte verso un'altra persona, ma anche verso se stessi o nei confronti di molti altri, per un periodo prolungato, duraturo. Fromm ha anche descritto l'amore come una scelta consapevole che nelle sue fasi iniziali potrebbe nascere come un sentimento involontario, ma che poi non viene più a dipendere solo da quei sentimenti, ma piuttosto da un impegno consapevole.
it-->Sebbene gli esseri umani non siano in genere sessualmente monogami, qualcuno ritiene tuttavia che siano emozionalmente monogami: possono amare (romanticamente) una sola persona alla volta. Quando una persona condivide con un'altra un amore per un lungo periodo di tempo, sviluppa un "attaccamento" sempre più forte verso l'altro individuo.
it-->Per quanto riguarda l'eventuale presenza di figli,secondo recenti teorie scientifiche sull'amore, questa transizione dall'attrazione all'attaccamento avverrebbe in circa 30 mesi: il tempo di portare a termine una gravidanza e di curare la prima infanzia del bambino. Dopo questo periodo la passione diminuirebbe, cambiando l'amore da amore romantico a un semplice piacere nello stare insieme. Quest'ultima fase durerebbe dai 10 ai 15 anni: finché la prole ha raggiunto l'adolescenza o più tardi (con variazioni considerevoli da cultura a cultura).
it-->Di solito una relazione che si basa su più fattori (affetto, attaccamento, stima, interessi comuni, attrazione sessuale) ha più possibilità di riuscita di una basata sulla sola attrazione sessuale. Questo "determinismo dell'amore", funzionale unicamente alla cura del bambino, è stato criticato da più parti, in particolare dai sostenitori dell'intelligenza emotiva.
it-->L'amore è la paura di perdere la persona o la cosa amata, accompagnano spesso un sentimento di protezione e/o gelosia verso l'oggetto di tale sentimento. In taluni casi l'amore assume aspetti patologici, quando è la causa che impedisce la conduzione di una vita normale o l'elemento scatenante di un attaccamento morboso.
it-->Il neuropsichiatra Frank Tallis ha evidenziato come i sintomi del mal d'amore siano identici ai sintomi di malattie mentali  .
it-->Accanto all'aspetto più sano dell'amore, esistono numerose varianti legate a patologie particolari che possono condurre a stati di sofferenza e gravi crisi di depressione. Nel libro Pazzi d'amore, Frank Tallis riporta gli studi della psicologa Dorothy Tennov intorno al fenomeno della Limerence. La Limerence sarebbe lo stato ossessivo, l'idealizzazione irrazionale e l'intenso desiderio di essere ricambiati. Gli individui colpiti da Limerence sono costantemente attratti da partner sbagliati, soffrono amori non corrisposti e sono incapaci di imparare dalle loro esperienze. Ne deriva un senso di angoscia emotiva e un grave senso di inutilità che accompagna la persona nel corso della vita. Questo senso di inutilità può emergere anche in un'altra forma particolare d'amore, erroneamente scambiata per semplice infedeltà. In questo caso, il soggetto può anche essere felicemente corrisposto ma è incapace di provare vero affetto per il partner. Innamorato dell'amore, egli si limita ad amare la sensazione dell'innamoramento suscitata dal partner, evitando di entrare nella fase matura della relazione di coppia, ossia quella che dall'infatuazione iniziale si dovrebbe trasformare - col passare del tempo - in vero amore. La relazione è dunque destinata a esaurirsi prima che la stessa cominci ad assumere un autentico significato e la responsabilità di gestire una relazione duratura.
it-->Altre forme patologiche d'amore possono essere date da fenomeni legati all'ambiguità dell'orientamento sessuale e dal forte desiderio di identificare il partner con le figure genitoriali. Entrambi questi casi hanno origine da evidenti disturbi infantili che influiscono costantemente sul carattere dell'individuo. Questo sarà dunque portato alla scelta di partner relativamente anziani in cui il fattore ideale prevale sul fattore sessuale. Un'altra, infatti, tra le forme patologiche dell'amore, risulta essere la frigidità, dove il soggetto - pur nutrendo impulsi sessuali normali e addirittura simulando atteggiamenti disinvolti - è incapace di trasferirli nella realtà fisica del rapporto sessuale.
it-->La lingua greca distingue vari significati differenti in cui può venir utilizzata la parola "amore". Ad esempio, il greco antico possiede i termini philia, eros, agape, storge e xenia . Tuttavia, con il greco (così come anche con molte altre lingue), può risultare alquanto difficoltoso separare storicamente i significati di queste parole in un modo univoco e totale. Allo stesso tempo, il testo greco della Bibbia riporta esempi del verbo "agapo" avente lo stesso significato di "phileo".
it-->Agape (ἀγάπη agape) significa specificamente amore nel greco moderno. Il termine "S'agapo" vuol dire "ti amo" in greco; la parola agapo corrisponde al verbo amore. Esso si riferisce generalmente ad un tipo ideale di amore "puro", piuttosto che all'attrazione fisica suggerita da eros. Tuttavia, ci sono alcuni esempi in cui si utilizza agape per indicare lo stesso significato dato da eros. È stato infine anche tradotto come "l'amore dell'anima."
it-->In senso più eminentemente religioso-spirituale è l'amore nei confronti del prossimo, un concetto vicino all'attuale idea di altruismo; si caratterizza per la sua spontaneità, non è perciò un atto intenzionale o una forma di cortesia superficiale proveniente dalla buona educazione, ma una vera e propria empatia per gli altri, vicini o sconosciuti che siano. Nella tradizione cristiana dei Padri della Chiesa, la parola è identificata con il concetto di beneficenza, anche se è più vicino ad un rapporto fisico instaurato con le persone che soffrono.
it-->Eros (ἔρως Eros) (dalla divinità greca Eros) è l'amore passionale, che conduce ed accompagna il desiderio sensuale. La parola greca erota significa innamorato. Platone ha affinato la sua propria definizione: anche se l'eros inizialmente è sentito per una persona, con la contemplazione diventa un apprezzamento della bellezza che è presente e vivente all'interno di quella persona, o addirittura diventa apprezzamento della bellezza stessa. Eros aiuta l'anima a riconoscere il richiamo della bellezza e contribuisce alla comprensione della verità spirituale. Amanti e filosofi sono entrambi, pertanto, ispirati a cercare la verità che proviene dall'eros. In alcune traduzioni può anche venir inteso come "amore per il corpo".
it-->A volte intesa come passione negativa prodotta da épithumia-appetito, ma anche come una forma di "pazzia divina" causa delle più grandi benedizioni per gli uomini. Esso tuttavia può mescolarsi con philia tramite la pederastia - nella sua accezione di pederastia greca - che lega un uomo maturo-erastes che ama ad uno più giovane-eromenos che viene amato.
it-->Philia (φιλία philia), un amore spassionato e virtuoso (un forte rispetto reciproco tra due persone di status simile), è stato un concetto affrontato ed ampiamente sviluppato da Aristotele. Comprende la lealtà rivolta agli amici, ai parenti e alla comunità di appartenenza; essa richiede la virtù, l'uguaglianza, e la familiarità. Philia è motivato da ragioni pratiche; una o entrambe le parti beneficiano del rapporto. Può anche significare "l'amore della mente"; è un concetto estensivo di amicizia che non poteva esistere altro che tra persone dello stesso sesso, a causa della forte disuguaglianza tra i sessi esistente.
it-->Storge (στοργή storge) è un affetto naturale, come quello sentito dai genitori per i figli.
it-->Xenia (ξενία Xenia), l'ospitalità, era una pratica estremamente importante nella Grecia antica . Era un'amicizia quasi ritualizzata formata tra un ospitante e dal suo ospite, che potrebbero anche esser stati in precedenza dei perfetti estranei. L'ospitante offre il vitto e fornisce un alloggio per gli ospiti, aspettandosi di essere rimborsati solamente con un senso di gratitudine e riconoscenza. L'importanza di questo istituto può essere veduto bene in tutta la mitologia greca e nella letteratura a partire da Omero in poi.
it-->La lingua latina possiede diversi verbi corrispondenti ad amore; "amo" è il suo verbo di base il cui infinito "amare" è ancor oggi utilizzato in lingua italiana e gli antichi lo usavano in senso affettuoso oltre che in senso romantico e sessuale. Da questo verbo deriva amans-amatore, l'amante spesso con nozione accessoria di lussuria e amica (fidanzata, ma spesso eufemisticamente applicato ad una prostituta).
it-->Il sostantivo corrispondente è amor ed il significato di questo termine per i Romani è ben illustrato nel fatto che Roma può essere un anagramma per Amor, utilizzato come nome segreto della città in ampie cerchie della popolazione durante i tempi antichi; utilizzato infine anche nella sua forma plurale per indicare amori o avventure sessuali.
it-->Questa stessa radice produce anche amicus-amico e amicitia-amicizia (spesso a base di un reciproco vantaggio, e corrispondente a volte ad un significato più vicino a quello di "indebitamento" o "influenza"). Cicerone scrisse un trattato intitolato "De amicitia (Cicerone)", che discute il concetto con una certa ampiezza. Ovidio ha scritto una vera e propria guida chiamata "Ars Amatoria", che affronta, in profondità, tutto ciò che concerne l'amore, dalle relazioni extraconiugali al problema dato dai genitori iperprotettivi.
it-->I latini usano a volte amare per indicare ciò che piace; nozione tuttavia che viene espressa più generalmente da placere o delectare, termini questi ultimi usati in forma più colloquiale, con molta frequenza ad esempio nella poesia amorosa di Catullo.
it-->Diligere contiene invece il concetto dell'esser affettuoso come conseguenza della stima portata; questa parola descrive anche opportunamente l'amicizia che può esistere tra due uomini, cioè affetto abbinato a stima. Il sostantivo corrispondente diligentia (da cui deriva diligente) prende invece il significato di prudenza ed ha poca sovrapposizione semantica col verbo. Observare è sinonimo di diligere, questo verbo col relativo sostantivo, observantia, denota anch'esso spesso la stima e l'affetto.
it-->Il termine Caritas è usato nelle traduzioni latine della Bibbia cristiana a significare "l'amore caritatevole"; questo significato, però, non si trova nella letteratura pagana classica, poiché deriva ad una fusione con una parola greca, non c'è quindi verbo corrispondente.
it-->Le varie religioni hanno in comune il fatto di accompagnare il sentimento dell'amore con un senso di trascendenza verso il sovrannaturale.
it-->L'amore per il Cristianesimo è il punto focale, essendo il concetto di amore, inteso in senso odierno nel mondo occidentale, esclusivamente cristiano. Nel cristianesimo l'amore di Dio è la somma benevolenza del Signore verso le creature terrene. Secondo quanto riportato dalla Prima lettera di Giovanni (4,16), Dio stesso è Amore. L'Amore di Dio, secondo il Cristianesimo, è in particolare Amore Misericordioso.
it-->Per i cristiani ogni gesto di Dio (creazione, redenzione dopo il peccato originale, provvidenza verso le sue creature), è compiuto per amore. S.Paolo nella Lettera agli Efesini (2,4-5) afferma che Dio "per il grande amore, con il quale ci ha amati, ci ha fatto rivivere in Cristo". Per il credente, l'evento centrale del Cristianesimo, cioè la morte e resurrezione di Gesù, è proprio una prova dell'amore di Dio.
it-->Nella versione della Sacra Bibbia della CEI, Conferenza Episcopale Italiana, al posto della parola amore viene posta la parola carità. I cristiani credono che amare Dio con tutto l cuore, la forza e la mente e amare il prossimo come se stessi siano due degli aspetti più importanti nella vita, quelli che le danno senso (i due comandamenti che riassumono gli altri) e dai quali deriva ogni altra norma morale. Questo è scritto nel Vangelo di Marco 12,28-34. Sant'Agostino ha riassunto ciò nell'espressione "Ama Dio e fa' ciò che vuoi". Per Agostino:
it-->L'amore venne definito da Dio una delle più importanti caratteristiche per poter vivere. Scrive Paolo, nella Prima lettera ai Corinzi:
it-->Con queste parole sembra aver glorificato l'amore come la più importante tra tutte le virtù.
it-->Giovanni evangelista scrisse: "Dio ha tanto amato il mondo da dare il suo Figlio unigenito, perché chiunque crede in lui non perisca, ma abbia vita eterna. Infatti Dio non ha mandato il Figlio nel mondo per condannare il mondo, ma per salvare il mondo per mezzo di lui." (Giovanni 3: 16-17) Scrisse anche, "Cari amici, amiamoci gli uni gli altri per l'amore che viene da Dio. Chiunque ama è generato da Dio e conosce Dio. Chi non ama non ha conosciuto Dio, perché Dio è amore " (1 Giovanni 4: 7-8)
it-->Per il cristiano, l'amare Dio implica quello che nel catechismo viene chiamata "l'obbedienza della fede" ovvero "obbedire (« ob-audire ») nella fede è sottomettersi liberamente alla parola ascoltata, perché la sua verità è garantita da Dio, il quale è la verità stessa". Con la sua rivelazione, "Dio invisibile nel suo immenso amore parla agli uomini come ad amici e si intrattiene con essi per invitarli ed ammetterli alla comunione con sé". La risposta adeguata a questo invito è la fede. Con la fede l'uomo sottomette pienamente a Dio la propria intelligenza e la propria volontà. Con tutto il suo essere l'uomo dà il proprio assenso a Dio rivelatore
it-->Molti teologi cristiani ritengono che l'amore degli uomini per le altre creature (e per Dio stesso) sia derivato direttamente da quello di Dio e che da esso derivi inoltre l'amore per tutto il creato. Secondo il Vangelo di Giovanni gli uomini amano il prossimo in Dio e Dio nel prossimo. In ogni essere umano c'è la presenza viva di Dio (in quanto creato a Sua immagine) che spinge chi Lo ama ad amare inevitabilmente ogni uomo. Nel Vangelo di Matteo (Parabola del Giudizio Universale 25,31-46), Gesù, il Figlio di Dio fatto uomo, afferma che tutto ciò che è stato fatto o che non è stato fatto a un fratello più "piccolo" (cioè a un essere umano) è stato o non è stato fatto a lui. Gesù afferma anche che l'impulso l'amore del prossimo debbono essere universali, senza discriminazioni tra persone buone e cattive (5,38-48, 6,27-35), pur nella difficoltà che ciò può richiedere (10,16-18).
it-->Agostino d'Ippona dice che si deve essere in grado di decifrare la differenza tra amore e lussuria e prosegue affermando "ero innamorato dell'amore". Nelle Confessioni afferma che l'unico che può amare veramente e pienamente è Dio, perché l'amore con un essere umano permette solo di sviluppare difetti quali "la gelosia, il sospetto, la paura, la rabbia, e la contesa; invece amare Dio è invece raggiungere la pace.
it-->Per Tommaso d'Aquino l'amore è dono, gratuità e fedeltà.
it-->Secondo papa Benedetto XVI, nella sua prima Enciclica (Deus caritas est), interamente dedicata all'amore cristiano, l'amore cristiano è per i cattolici unione di eros e agape, cioè di passione e sentimento (carità), diretto verso Dio e verso i fratelli. Eros senza agape sarebbe puro istinto sessuale, agape senza eros toglierebbe alla carità quella spinta impulsiva di carità verso gli altri.
it-->Comunque nella religione cristiana, l'amore ha una grande importanza, in quanto è anche il fondamento di uno dei sette sacramenti: il matrimonio; a tal proposito Gesù, commentando i testi della Genesi relativi all'unione fra un uomo e una donna, disse anche: "Quello dunque che Dio ha unito, l'uomo non separi" (19,3-12), riferendosi all'adulterio e al divorzio, che costituiscono un ripudio dell'amore e della persona amata (5,27-28 e 5,31-32).
it-->L'amore cristiano si manifesta intensamente nel perdono dei torti e dei peccati, e per questo si parla in particolare di Amore Misericordioso: Dio dona gratuitamente il perdono dei peccati all'uomo che vuole pentirsi dei propri errori e con Lui si riconcilia; l'uomo, a sua volta, perdona di cuore i propri fratelli (gli altri uomini) ogni volta che subisce un torto, qualunque sia la sua gravità o la sua frequenza (facendo talvolta ricorso alla preghiera per ricevere da Dio l'aiuto, gratuito, della capacità di perdonare torti apparentemente imperdonabili) (6,14-15, 18,21-35).
it-->Esemplare è infine la parabola del buon Samaritano (Vangelo di Matteo, 5, 44 e Luca, 10, 29-40).
it-->Patrono degli innamorati per i cristiani è San Valentino e il 14 febbraio viene festeggiata questa ricorrenza (festività che ha ormai superato i confini religiosi ed è festeggiato in quasi tutto il mondo)
it-->L'ebraismo impiega una vasta definizione d'amore, sia tra le persone sia tra la persona umana e il Signore.
it-->La Torah (Pentateuco) dice "ama il prossimo tuo come te stesso" (Levitico 19.18). Un individuo deve amare il Signore "con tutto il tuo cuore, tutta la tua anima, tutti i tuoi possedimenti" (Deuteronomio), 6.5 (vedi anche Shemà).
it-->La letteratura rabbinica differisce su come l'amore possa esser sviluppato, e su come contemplare i beni divini e le meraviglie della natura. L'amore coniugale è considerato un elemento essenziale per la vita: "guarda la vita con la moglie che tu ami" (Ecclesiaste 9.9). Il testo biblico del Cantico dei Cantici è considerato una metafora romantica dell'amore di Dio verso il suo popolo. Il rabbino Eliyahu Eliezer Dessler è invece noto per aver definito l'amore secondo la concezione ebraica come "dare senza aspettarsi di ricevere".
it-->L'amore romantico di per sé ha poche citazioni nella letteratura ebraica, sebbene il rabbino medievale Judah Halevi scrisse poesie romantiche in arabo durante la giovinezza.
it-->Nel Corano c'è scritto "Chi non prova affetto non riceverà affetto".
it-->Ishq, o amore divino, è parola d'ordine del sufismo nella tradizione islamica. I praticanti del Sufismo credono che l'amore sia una proiezione dell'essenza di Dio con l'universo; Dio desidera riconoscere la bellezza, è come quando ci si guarda in uno specchio per vedere se stessi.
it-->Nell'induismo l'amore e il piacere sensuale (Kama, personificato dal dio Kamadeva) è desiderio naturale, dono della divinità, e rappresenta uno dei quattro scopi della vita (purushārtha); "Mara" è un altro dei suoi nomi. In contrasto con il kāma, prema, o "prem", è l'amore elevato, spirituale, divino.
it-->Karuna è la compassione misericordiosa, che spinge a contribuire a ridurre la sofferenza presente negli altri esseri.
it-->Con il termine sanscrito bhakti si intende invece la devozione amorosa nei confronti di Dio. La bhakti nel Bhagavata Purana e nelle Tulsidas viene distinta in nove forme di devozione, rivolte generalmente al dio Krisna. Il libretto Narada bhakti sutra scritto da un autore sconosciuto, ne distingue invece undici forme.
it-->In alcune sette Vaishnava (seguaci di Vishnu) all'interno dell'induismo, raggiungere l'amore incondizionato e incessante di Dio è considerato l'obiettivo più importante della vita. I Gaudiya Vaishnava che adorano Krishna come la Persona Suprema e la causa di tutte le cause considerano l'Amore per Dio (Prema) agente in due modi possibili: Sambhoga e vipralambha (unione e separazione), due apparenti opposti.
it-->Nella condizione di separazione, vi è un desiderio acuto di tornare con l'amato e nella condizione di unione v'è d'altra parte la felicità suprema e totalizzante. Il movimento Gaudiya Vaishnava ritiene che Krishna-prema (l'Amore per Dio) è una specie di fuoco atto a bruciare e gettar via i propri desideri materiali: Krsna-prema non è un'arma, ma purttuttavia trafigge il cuore. Non è l'acqua, ma purtuttavia lava via del tutto la sensazione d'orgoglio. Krishna-prema è considerato attrarre in un oceano di estasi trascendentale e di piacere in cui si "annega".
it-->L'amore di Radha, la ragazza-mandriana, per Krishna è spesso citato come l'esempio supremo di amore per Dio dai Gaudiya Vaishnava. Radha è considerata la potenza interna di Krishna, ed è l'amante supremo della Divinità. Il suo esempio di amore è considerato al di là della comprensione del regno materiale in quanto supera ogni forma di amore egoistico o di lussuria che è visibile nel mondo materiale. Il reciproco amore tra Radha (l'amante supremo) e Krishna (Dio come sommamente amato) è oggetto di molte composizioni poetiche in India come la Gita Govinda e l'Hari Bhakti Shuddhodhaya.
it-->Nella tradizione Bhakti all'interno dell'induismo, si ritiene che l'esecuzione del servizio di devozione a Dio porta allo sviluppo dell'Amore per Dio (taiche bhakti-Phale krsne prema upajaya) e come l'amore per Dio cresce nel cuore, più si diventa liberi dalla contaminazione materiale (krishna-prema asvada Haile, bhava nasa paya). Essere perfettamente in uno stato e condizione d'amore con Dio-Krishna rende perfettamente liberi da ogni "laccio terreno". Questa è la maniera migliore di salvezza o liberazione: in questa tradizione, la salvezza o la liberazione è considerata inferiore all'Amore, solo un suo incidentale sottoprodotto. Essere assorbiti nell'amore per Dio è considerato così esser l'unica vera e sola a perfezione della vita.
it-->La definizione di "amore" nel buddhismo è il volere che gli altri siano felici. Questo amore è incondizionato e richiede molto coraggio e accettazione, sia degli altri sia di sé. Il nemico dell'amore vero è qualcosa che può sembrargli simile ma è invece il suo opposto: l'attaccamento, che deriva dall'amore di sé inteso come preoccupazione per il proprio benessere. L'amore nel buddhismo è perciò qualcosa di molto differente da quello che s'intende comunemente in italiano (attaccamento, relazione e sesso), che quasi sempre richiede un certo amor proprio. Nel buddhismo si riferisce al distacco e alla cura del benessere degli altri senza alcun interesse verso se stessi.
it-->Il Bodhisattva ideale nel buddismo Mahayana comporta la completa rinuncia di se stessi, al fine di assumere l'onere di un mondo sofferente. La più forte delle motivazione, al fine di prendere il sentiero del Bodhisattva è l'idea di salvazione disinteressata, l'amore altruistico per tutti gli esseri senzienti.
it-->Varie culture hanno divinizzato l'amore, sia nella forma maschile sia in quella femminile. Questa è una lista di dei dell'amore in mitologie differenti.
it-->Cupido o Amore: dio della mitologia romana.
it-->Venere: dea della mitologia romana.
it-->Afrodite: dea della mitologia greca.
it-->Eros: dio della mitologia greca.
it-->Freyja: dea della mitologia norrena.
it-->Xochipilli: dio della mitologia azteca.
it-->Il sentimento dell'amore è spesso la base d'ispirazione delle principali manifestazioni artistiche quali la musica, la letteratura, le arti figurative e il cinema.
it-->Publio Virgilio Marone nelle sue Bucoliche (X, 69) ebbe a dire "Omnia vincit amor et nos cedamus amori" (lett. "L'amore vince tutto, anche noi cediamo all'amore")", verso divenuto celebre e ripreso in seguito anche da vari altri autori; nella sua qualità di locuzione latina è stata immortalata in pittura da Michelangelo Merisi da Caravaggio col suo Amor vincit omnia.
it-->Durante il Medioevo l'amore è stato oggetto di misticismo religioso da un lato, con Bernardo di Chiaravalle e soprattutto con Bonaventura da Bagnoregio (negli scritti "Stimulus amoris", "Incendium amoris" e "Amatorium"), ed un particolare tipo di poesia dall'altro; questa letteratura poetica, nata nel sud della Francia, si diffuse presto a macchia d'olio in tutto il continente europeo: si tratta della cosiddetta poesia trobadorica (dai suoi autori chiamati ”trovatori“) che canta l'amor cortese, una relazione amorosa in gran parte idealizzata, rivolta a donne lontane o irraggiungibili.
it-->Nella Divina Commedia di Dante Alighieri, si possono trovare molte terzine in cui "l'Amore" è dominatore incontrastato e motivo ricorrente in tutta l'opera: innanzitutto nella parte dedicata alla storia di Paolo e Francesca, ove domina l'amore terreno: (Inferno - Canto quinto vv. 73-142):
it-->fino a giungere all'amore supremo, assoluto, ch'è anche l'ultimo verso del Paradiso (Divina Commedia)
it-->Nell'età del Rinascimento, con le opere di Marsilio Ficino, il suo allievo Francesco Cattani da Diacceto e Giordano Bruno, comincia a svilupparsi sempre più il neoplatonismo; una delle basi fondanti di questa dottrina filosofica è l'amore nei confronti di tutto ciò che è bello, natura ed essenza dell'amore essendo quindi la ricerca della bellezza. Questo concetto si riferisce sia all'etica che all'estetica, ed avrà un impatto significativo su tutta l'arte rinascimentale.
it-->Nel secolo seguente, in particolare nel periodo barocco, l'olandese Baruch Spinoza, pensatore che ha studiato seriamente la questione soprattutto nella sua Etica (Spinoza), ebbe a dare la seguente definizione: l'amore non è altro che gioia accompagnata dall'idea di una causa esterna (Amor est Laetitia concomitante idea causae externae). Spinoza identifica poi l'amore con la conoscenza assoluta (amor Dei intellectualis)
it-->L'amore è sempre stato uno dei temi preferiti in tutta la storia della pittura e della scultura, dalla rappresentazione di situazioni romantiche o riconducenti ad una qualche simbologia o allegoria, che vengono spesso a coinvolgere personaggi mitologici.
it-->Ma anche i grandi amori terreni vengono raffigurati, soprattutto quelli appartenenti alle storie letterarie più conosciute come Tristano e Isotta, Abelardo e Eloisa, Paolo e Francesca, Romeo e Giulietta, l'amore tra Ulisse e Penelope narrato nell'Odissea, assieme a molti altri sono stati trattati in pittura, soprattutto nei periodi più favorevoli all'espressione più libera dei sentimenti (Preraffaelliti, arte romantica ecc ).
it-->Il biologo Jeremy Griffith definisce l'amore come "altruismo incondizionato". Il neurobiologo Semir Zeki ha studiato i possibili circuiti neuronali sottesi dagli stati d'amore, in particolare individuando strette connessioni fra amore romantico e amore materno. La neurobiologia degli stati amorosi è un nuovo campo di ricerca delle neuroscienze tuttora aperto, mirante allo studio sia neurobiologico che psicologico degli stati affettivi negli esseri umani.
it-->Anche la neuropsicologia cognitiva beneficia di quest'ultime ricerche: per esempio, sono stati rilevati migliori risultati e più efficienti prestazioni in compiti cognitivi se condotti in presenza di uno stato amoroso. Inoltre, l'amore romantico s'è rivelato essere una componente fondamentale del sistema motivazionale e di ricompensa degli esseri umani. Ben note sono poi le notevoli relazioni intercorrenti fra amore romantico ed autostima.
it-->Il termine amore libero è stato utilizzato in tempi recenti per descrivere quel movimento sociale che rifiuta il matrimonio come istituzione costrittiva, sia civile che religiosa, in quanto inteso come forma di schiavitù o comunque obbligo sociale. Obiettivo iniziale dei fautori dell'amore libero è stato quello di separare le leggi dello stato da tutto ciò che concerneva la materia sessuale come l'adulterio e il controllo delle nascite, anche nella fattispecie dell'aborto, sostenendo che tali questioni dovevano interessare esclusivamente le persone coinvolte e nessun altro.
it-->La maggior parte delle persone ancora nel XIX secolo erano fermamente convinte che il matrimonio fosse un aspetto fondamentale del modo di realizzare la propria esistenza e di raggiungere la felicità umana terrena; la classe media ha sempre creduto esser la casa il luogo primario di stabilità nel bel mezzo dell'incertezza del mondo. Questa mentalità ha creato una visione dei ruoli di genere fortemente definiti, il che ha prodotto la crescita del movimento dell'amore libero qual forza oppositiva rispetto allo status quo vigente.
it-->Tutto ciò ha inoltre accelerato anche la presa di coscienza di auto determinazione da parte delle donne, e quali hanno iniziato per la prima volta a pretendere ad alta voce di amministrare il proprio corpo nella maniera che meglio preferivano; questo è stato uno dei cavalli di battaglia del movimento femminista.
it-->Il XX secolo resuscita anche una concezione più edonistica dell'amore, soprattutto attraverso il movimento hippie e con celebri slogan quali "Fate l'amore, non fate la guerra".
it-->Innamoramento
it-->Sessualità
it-->Erotismo
it-->Matrimonio
it-->Amore a prima vista
it-->Amore platonico
it-->Agape
it-->Amore romantico
it-->Poliamore
it--> Wikisource contiene i testi completi di alcuni canti d'amore
it--> Wikiquote contiene citazioni sull'amore
it--> Wikizionario contiene il lemma di dizionario «amore»
it--> Wikimedia Commons contiene immagini o altri file sull'amore
it-->Amore, in Thesaurus del Nuovo soggettario, BNCF, marzo 2013.
nl-->Liefde betekent diepe acceptatie van en genegenheid voor, welgezindheid tot of toewijding voor een ander, of eventueel zichzelf. Het kan ook betrekking hebben op een dier, zaak of voorwerp.
nl-->De betekenissen die eraan gegeven worden zijn sterk cultureel en maatschappelijk geïnspireerd.
nl-->Vanuit de christelijke traditie geldt dat het enerzijds – als uiterste – een zichzelf opofferende en een ander weldaden schenkende houding is (agape). Deze soort liefde richt zich op de behoeften van de ander en zoekt wat het beste voor de ander is. In dat geval laat de liefde de ander de vrije keus om die liefde te beantwoorden of niet. Dit soort liefde vraagt offers en hard werken voor hen die daarnaar streven. Echter voor de weinige mensen die volledig afstand hebben gedaan van hun egoïsme is deze liefde een levende bron die geen inspanning meer vergt, maar vanzelfsprekend en natuurlijk is.
nl-->De ruimere definitie van liefde is de onvoorwaardelijke liefde (Metta). Zij is het soort liefde dat de andere persoon de volledige onvoorwaardelijke ruimte en vrijheid schept zichzelf te kunnen zijn.
nl-->Liefde kan bijvoorbeeld een speciaal soort aantrekking tot een persoon of voorwerp zijn. Het is dan een gevoel of emotie. In de sterkste vorm geeft het mensen de indruk dat ze zonder het object van hun liefde niet meer verder kunnen in het leven, de indruk dat ze psychologisch afhankelijk zijn van de aanwezigheid.
nl-->Liefde kan zich als charitas uiten, een schenking aan een goed doel. Charitas vindt voornamelijk plaats op emotionele grond, gebaseerd op het graag willen helpen bij iets waar men emotioneel betrokken bij is. Het kan echter ook op louter rationele grond gebaseerd zijn.
nl-->Liefde geeft iemand het gevoel dat hij onoverwinnelijk is, en alles voor de ander over heeft, de emotie is bijna niet te beschrijven, de één zegt dat hij het gevoel heeft dat hij kan vliegen en de ander voelt zich geweldig en gelukkig.
nl-->Men dient een onderscheid te maken tussen liefde en verliefdheid, dat zich laat beschrijven als een tijdelijke chemische reactie in de hersenen.
nl-->Beide fenomenen zijn wetenschappelijk verklaard, hoewel vanuit bijvoorbeeld de systeemwetenschap het terugbrengen van verliefdheid tot 'chemische reactie' te sterk reductionistisch is. Het zijn immers niet de chemische reacties zélf die de zeer invloedrijke interactie tussen twee verliefde mensen teweegbrengen; tussen chemie en geslachtsgemeenschap zit een hele keten van (al dan niet cultureel bepaald) gedrag, die nog niet volledig verklaard is.
nl-->De term liefde verwijst naar relaties tussen mensen onderling, tussen mensen en objecten, enzovoort. Liefdesrelaties worden gekenmerkt door zekere gedragingen en gaan vaak gepaard met bepaalde emoties zoals seksuele gevoelens, ontroering, welzijnsgevoel en combinaties hiervan. Het bestaan van die relaties kan vrij gemakkelijk verklaard worden door het feit dat ze in het maatschappelijke functioneren een belangrijke rol spelen. Bijvoorbeeld, zonder de moederliefde zou het voortbestaan van kinderen veel minder gegarandeerd zijn: de zorg voor het kroost komt daarom ook bij talloze diersoorten voor. In de dierlijke wereld kunnen we liefde waarnemen zoals seksuele drift en nestverzorging. Menselijke relaties zijn echter zo complex dat ze niet louter op hormonen te herleiden zijn. Materiële processen zijn niettemin relevant, vanwege de biologische en psychologische constitutie van de mens. Liefde en ratio sluiten elkaar evenmin uit. De keuze van het voorwerp der liefde kan onbewust of bewust gemaakt worden op basis van feitelijke overwegingen. Zo beschouwt Fritz Heider, de psycholoog en grondlegger van de balanstheorie, in zijn werk "The Psychology Of Interpersonal Relations" liefde als een positive liking relation tussen twee personen, die een gemeenschappelijke betrokkenheid hebben tot iets anders.
nl-->Er bestaan verschillende soorten liefde:
nl-->Liefde voor mensen in het algemeen: naastenliefde, caritas of 'onbaatzuchtige liefde' (Liefde die schenkt en er niets voor terug verwacht)
nl-->Liefde tot/van God, of van mens tot mens met God als tussenpersoon (agape)
nl-->Onvoorwaardelijke liefde voor alle levende wezens (metta, begrip uit het boeddhisme)
nl-->Liefde tussen familieleden, de liefde van ouders voor hun kinderen, enz. (storge)
nl-->Liefde voor vrienden (philia)
nl-->Liefde voor vreemden, gastvrijheid. (xenia)
nl-->Romantische liefde (verliefdheid)
nl-->Platonische liefde
nl-->Seksuele liefde, eros
nl-->Liefde voor zichzelf (een ontaarde vorm hiervan heet narcisme)
nl-->Liefde tot een abstractum (bv. waarheidsliefde, taalliefde/taalmin)
nl-->Rituele vormen van liefde; hoofse liefde.
nl-->Liefde voor een voorwerp, of een lichaamsdeel buiten de gebruikelijke erogene zones (in extreme mate: fetisjisme)
nl-->Liefde voor het vaderland (vaderlandsliefde)
nl-->In zijn boek De Vier Liefdes (ISBN 90-5194-081-5), verkent de schrijver C.S. Lewis de aard van de liefde. Hij maakt daarbij onderscheid in behoefte liefde (zoals de liefde van een kind voor zijn moeder) en gevende liefde (benadrukt in de liefde van God voor de mensheid). Op basis van de vier woorden voor liefde in het Oudgrieks verdeelt Lewis het woord 'liefde' in vier categorieën: genegenheid (storge), vriendschap (philia), erotiek (eros), en liefdadigheid (charis).
nl-->Haat wordt ook als een vorm van omgekeerde liefde gezien: een negatieve aantrekking op grond van psychologische projectie van de schaduwzijde van iemand op een ander. Ook wordt haat juist als een extreme uiting van liefde gezien: de liefde tot het één uit zich in haat voor het ander.
nl-->Een van de symbolen van liefde is een gestileerd plaatje van een hart.
nl-->Het emoticon voor liefde is <3, dat een hart voorstelt.
en-->A person is a being that has certain capacities or attributes such as reason, morality, consciousness or self-consciousness, and being a part of a culturally established form of social relations such as kinship, ownership of property, or legal responsibility. The defining features of personhood and consequently what makes a person count as a person differ widely among cultures and contexts.
en-->In addition to the question of personhood, of what makes a being count as a person to begin with, there are further questions about personal identity and self: both about what makes any particular person that particular person instead of another, and about what makes a person at one time the same person as they were or will be at another time despite any intervening changes.
en-->The common plural of "person", "people", is often used to refer to an entire nation or ethnic group (as in "a people"). The plural "persons" is often used in philosophical and legal writing.
en-->In ancient Rome, the word persona (Latin) or prosopon (πρόσωπον; Greek) originally referred to the masks worn by actors on stage. The various masks represented the various "personae" in the stage play.
en-->The concept of person was further developed during the Trinitarian and Christological debates of the 4th and 5th centuries in contrast to the word nature. During the theological debates, some philosophical tools (concepts) were needed so that the debates could be held on common basis to all theological schools. The purpose of the debate was to establish the relation, similarities and differences between the Λóγος/Verbum and God. The philosophical concept of person arose, taking the word "prosopon" (πρόσωπον) from the Greek theatre. Therefore, Christus (the Λóγος/Verbum) and God were defined as different "persons". This concept was applied later to the Holy Ghost, the angels and to all human beings.
en-->Since then, a number of important changes to the word's meaning and use have taken place, and attempts have been made to redefine the word with varying degrees of adoption and influence.
en-->The criteria for being a person... are designed to capture those attributes which are the subject of our most humane concern with ourselves and the source of what we regard as most important and most problematical in our lives.
en-->Personhood is the status of being a person. Defining personhood is a controversial topic in philosophy and law, and is closely tied to legal and political concepts of citizenship, equality, and liberty. According to common worldwide general legal practice, only a natural person or legal personality has rights, protections, privileges, responsibilities, and legal liability. Personhood continues to be a topic of international debate, and has been questioned during the abolition of slavery and the fight for women's rights, in debates about abortion, fetal rights, and in animal rights advocacy.
en-->Various debates have focused on questions about the personhood of different classes of entities. Historically, the personhood of animals, women, and slaves has been a catalyst of social upheaval. In most societies today, living adult humans are usually considered persons, but depending on the context, theory or definition, the category of "person" may be taken to include or not children or such non-human entities as animals, artificial intelligences, or extraterrestrial life, as well as legal entities such as corporations, sovereign states and other polities, or estates in probate.
en-->Personal identity is the unique identity of persons through time. That is to say, the necessary and sufficient conditions under which a person at one time and a person at another time can be said to be the same person, persisting through time. In the modern philosophy of mind, this concept of personal identity is sometimes referred to as the diachronic problem of personal identity. The synchronic problem is grounded in the question of what features or traits characterize a given person at one time.
en-->Identity is an issue for both continental philosophy and analytic philosophy. A key question in continental philosophy is in what sense we can maintain the modern conception of identity, while realizing many of our prior assumptions about the world are incorrect.
en-->Proposed solutions to the problem of personal identity include continuity of the physical body, continuity of an immaterial mind or soul, continuity of consciousness or memory, the bundle theory of self, continuity of personality after the death of the physical body, and proposals that there are actually no persons or selves who persist over time at all.
en-->Cornelia J. de Vogel (1963). The Concept of Personality in Greek and Christian Thought. In Studies in Philosophy and the History of Philosophy. Vol. 2. Edited by J. K. Ryan, Washington: Catholic University of America Press. pp. 20–60
en-->Lukes, Steven; Carrithers, Michael; Collins, Steven, eds. (1987). The Category of the Person: Anthropology, Philosophy, History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-27757-4. 
en-->Puccetti, Roland (1968). Persons: A Study of Possible Moral Agents in the Universe. London: Macmillan and Company. 
en-->Stephens, William O. (2006). The Person: Readings in Human Nature. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson. ISBN 978-0-13-184811-5.
en--> Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). "Person". Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company. 
en-->Korfmacher, Carsten (May 29, 2006). "Personal Identity". The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Retrieved 2011-03-09. 
en-->Rights of Non-Human Persons Program (Institute for Ethics and Emerging Technologies)
fr-->En grammaire, le nom ou substantif est une des principales natures de mots dans lesquelles se classent les lemmes (unités autonomes du lexique) d'une langue. Les noms forment une classe ouverte qui peut librement s'enrichir de nouveaux mots. Comme les autres natures de mots, le nom peut être défini à la fois sur des critères sémantiques, morphologiques et syntaxiques, à des degrés divers suivant les langues et les théories linguistiques.
fr-->D'un point de vue sémantique, les noms désignent le plus typiquement des entités en soi, indépendamment de la temporalité. Il peut s'agir d'êtres (fille, maçon, chat, arbre...), de choses (maison, pierre, feu, livre...), de sensations (lumière, peur, musique, goût...), de notions (force, idée, âge, style...), etc.
fr-->L'opération de dérivation lexicale qui consiste à transformer en nom un lemme d'une autre nature s'appelle la nominalisation ou substantivation. Une dérivation qui part d'un nom produit à son tour un dénominal ou dénominatif.
fr-->Le terme de « nom » a eu, au cours de l’histoire, un sens plus large, ce terme ayant désigné aussi bien les substantifs que les adjectifs. On a ainsi parlé de « noms substantifs » et de « noms adjectifs ». Cependant, cette terminologie n’est plus vraiment en usage actuellement.
fr-->Émile Littré dans son Dictionnaire de la langue française classe ainsi les noms :
fr-->Noms substantifs : qui donne une substance ;
fr-->Noms substantifs appellatifs : ce qu'on appelle aujourd'hui nom commun : encyclopédiste, poubelle ;
fr-->Noms substantifs collectifs : un singulier désignant un pluriel : foule, troupe ;
fr-->Noms substantifs propres : tous les noms qui commencent avec une majuscule : les Encyclopédistes, Eugène Poubelle, Napoléon Bonaparte ;
fr-->Noms adjectifs : ce qu'on appelle aujourd'hui adjectif : hardi, grand.
fr-->À l'instar des autres mots pleins (adjectif, verbe et adverbe), le nom produit du sens, mais c'est en outre la seule catégorie (à l'exception toutefois de certains pronoms et de certains adverbes) à pouvoir être associée à un référent (ou référence), c'est-à-dire, à un objet de la réalité extralinguistique.
fr-->C'est pour cette raison que le nom est également appelé substantif, puisqu'il désigne la substance des personnes, des animaux, des choses, mais également, des idées, des sentiments, des qualités, des actions, etc. à laquelle le discours fait référence.
fr-->Pour que la fonction référentielle du nom soit effective, il faut généralement que le nom soit actualisé par un déterminant, faute de quoi, il reste virtuel. Tel est le cas, par exemple, des noms se trouvant dans le dictionnaire. Les linguistes ont d'ailleurs coutume de dire à ce propos « qu'il n'y a pas de référent dans le dictionnaire ».
fr-->Analysons par exemple le statut du nom « biscuit » dans les deux syntagmes suivants, « une boîte à biscuits » et « une boîte pour mes biscuits ». Ce nom est virtuel dans le premier syntagme : en effet, le nom « biscuit » ne possédant pas de déterminant, on ne peut donc l'identifier puisqu'il n'a pas de référent propre. Au contraire, ce même nom est actuel dans le second syntagme : en effet, le nom « biscuit » étant alors précédé du déterminant « mes », on peut à présent l'identifier puisqu'il possède son référent propre, distinct de celui du nom « boîte » (par exemple, il s'agit peut-être des biscuits que j'ai achetés ce matin au supermarché…).
fr-->La plupart des langues distinguent le nom commun et le nom propre.
fr-->Le nom commun peut s’appliquer à plusieurs entités distinctes. Il peut être doté d'une définition générale permettant de délimiter la classe d'entités auxquelles il fait référence.
fr-->Le nom propre fait référence à une entité spécifique, généralement unique, et n'a pas d'autre signification que de la désigner en soi : Bruxelles, Napoléon Ier, Ottawa, la tour Eiffel, Carmen, l'Atlantique, Rome… Il s'écrit avec une majuscule.
fr-->La figure de style appelée antonomase permet d'employer des noms propres comme des noms communs, ou, à l'inverse, des noms communs pour des noms propres.
fr-->Les noms sont généralement catégorisés en fonction de critères sémantiques, syntaxiques ou morphologiques, et sont ainsi associés à des classes nominales. Il ressort de ces catégorisations un certain nombre d'oppositions, souvent canoniques : « noms masculin », « noms féminins » et « noms neutres », « noms massifs » et « noms comptables », « noms concrets » et « noms abstraits », « noms animés » et « noms inanimés », etc.
fr-->Certains noms peuvent avoir des propriétés liées au sexe de la réalité qu’il représentent. Ils définissent alors un genre grammatical. Cependant, cette notion est surtout grammaticale. En effet, d’une part, la répartition des genres, masculin, féminin et neutre, ne correspond pas toujours à des critères sémantiques, et peut, de ce fait, être perçue comme arbitraire dans de nombreux cas. D’autre part, dans certaines langues, comme en polonais et en slovène, d’autres distinctions peuvent être prises en compte pour la définition des genres, si bien que la distinction entre « classe grammaticale » et « genre » est même parfois contestée.
fr-->En français, certains noms communs, comme lait ou acier, s'utilisent le plus souvent au singulier, tandis que d’autres, comme chat et ensemble, s'utilisent aussi bien au singulier qu'au pluriel. De plus, les noms comme lait peuvent être précédés par les déterminants comme du et un peu de, mais plus difficilement par chaque, des, plusieurs ou un nombre (sauf dans certains emplois, quand on veut parler de plusieurs types de laits, ou de commandes à un bar, par exemple). Les noms comme chat, au contraire, peuvent être utilisés aussi bien avec les déterminants comme des ou plusieurs qu’avec les nombres ; mais ils sont plus difficilement combinables avec du ou un peu de. Ces noms ont été respectivement appelés noms massifs et noms comptables,.
fr-->Dans de nombreuses langues, notamment les langues romanes et germaniques, l’on peut de même identifier deux sous-classes morpho-syntaxiques de noms communs, celle des noms ayant un nombre grammatical invariable et celle des noms admettant le singulier et le pluriel.
fr-->Un nom concret désigne toute substance pouvant être perçue par l'un de nos cinq sens (vue, ouïe, odorat, goût et toucher) : La maison, une fleur, le chat, un ami, l'odeur, une musique, la saveur, le froid…
fr-->Un nom abstrait désigne toute substance réelle ou figurée qui ne tombe pas sous nos sens et que seules nos facultés cérébrales peuvent appréhender : l'habitat, une floraison, l'amitié, un courage, la sagesse, la musicalité, l'admiration…
fr-->Diverses langues distinguent grammaticalement les objets animés et inanimés. La distinction peut aussi s'opérer entre « humain » et « non humain ».
fr-->Un nom animé désigne un être vivant, humain, animal, ou assimilé, réel ou imaginaire. Seul un nom concret peut désigner un animé (personne, animal, être surnaturel, dieu…) : Charlemagne, un fermier, un renard, un lutin, une licorne, les lares, Neptune…
fr-->Un nom inanimé désigne soit une chose concrète, soit une idée abstraite. Naturellement, les noms abstraits sont tous des inanimés : la paresse, la bonté, le courage, la course…
fr-->Un nom individuel désigne un référent unique : une personne, une brebis, la pierre, un euro, l'étoile, le client, un employé, un outil…
fr-->Un nom collectif, quoique singulier, désigne un ensemble de référents : une foule, un groupe, un tas, un million, une infinité, la clientèle, le personnel, le mobilier…
fr-->Dans certains cas, un nom collectif employé avec un complément de nom, peut servir de déterminant indéfini, plus précisément, de quantificateur nominal : un troupeau de brebis.
fr-->Dans ce syntagme nominal, on peut considérer que le noyau est, soit le nom « troupeau », complété par « brebis » (complément de nom), soit le nom « brebis », déterminé par « un troupeau de », adjectif indéfini ou quantificateur. Selon le noyau pris en considération, l'accord du verbe sera modifié en conséquence : Une multitude d'oiseaux a traversé le ciel. / Une multitude d'oiseaux ont traversé le ciel.
fr-->Un nom peut être constitué uniquement d’un lexème, mais également, selon un procédé de formation des mots, à partir de mots de natures diverses, notamment par dérivation. Des noms peuvent ainsi être formés, par exemple,
fr-->par conversion. Ils sont obtenus sans modification apparente du mot d’origine. Exemple : à partir des adjectifs de couleurs bleu, jaune, rouge sont formés des noms de couleurs : le bleu, le jaune, le rouge. Il s'agit alors d’une nominalisation ou substantivation.
fr-->par construction. Ils sont obtenus par adjonction d’un affixe. Exemple de construction d’un nom par suffixation : l’adjectif grand, donne le nom ou substantif grandeur par adjonction du suffixe -eur au radical grand-.
fr-->par dérivation régressive
fr-->par composition. Un nom composé est formé de plusieurs éléments, réunis ou non par des traits d'union ou des apostrophes : ce sont des ensembles nominaux fixes. On distingue les noms composés unifiés des noms composés dont les éléments sont reliés par des traits d'union ou apostrophes.
fr-->Un nom simple, par opposition aux noms composés, obtenus par composition, est un nom constitué uniquement d’un item lexical ou bien dérivé d’un item lexical par un autre procédé que la composition (par exemple, par conversion ou par construction).
fr-->Un nom composé peut être constitué de mots réunis au moyen de trait d'union ou d'apostrophe : abat-jour, arc-en-ciel, chef-d'œuvre, cure-dent, tout-à-l'égout, presqu'île…
fr-->Un nom composé unifié est constitué de mots soudés (ou agglutinés), c'est-à-dire, réunis sans espace ni trait d'union : bonhomme, monsieur, passeport, portefeuille, contrevent, vaurien…
fr-->Dans certaines langues, appelées langues flexionnelles, les noms peuvent comporter des marques de flexion. Les flexions des noms sont appelées déclinaisons. Chacune des formes fléchies du nom donne alors des indications diverses, selon les langues, sur leur cas, genre et nombre.
fr-->Le substantif peut se décliner en genre et en nombre. Par exemple : les trois girafes ou les parlers provençaux. Parlers est alors un substantif masculin pluriel.
fr-->Il est variable en nombre (singulier ou pluriel) et parfois en genre (masculin ou féminin).
fr-->Le nom forme, avec les déterminants et les adjectifs qui se rapportent à lui, un syntagme ou groupe nominal.
fr-->En français, le noyau du syntagme nominal est toujours un nom qui impose normalement son genre et son nombre à ses satellites déterminants et qualificatifs et plus généralement aux mots auxquels il se rapporte : l'attribut mais aussi et surtout le verbe dont il est le sujet. Typiquement, le groupe nominal occupe une fonction de sujet, de complément d’une préposition ou de complément d’un verbe.
fr-->Le nom en français est le plus souvent précédé d'un déterminant. Cependant, le substantif peut également se trouver sans déterminant, notamment au vocatif : « Homme libre, toujours tu chériras la mer » livre ainsi un exemple de substantif, homme, sans déterminant. Et la nature du lexème ne peut pas non plus toujours être déduite de la fonction qu’il occupe dans la phrase. Ainsi, dans « marcher fait du bien », le sujet, marcher, n’est pas précédé d’un déterminant et n’est ni un substantif, ni un verbe substantivé, mais un verbe à l'infinitif.
fr-->Le substantif ne forme pas toujours à lui seul une unité de sens. Ainsi, pour former un nom, d’après la définition sémantique et non grammaticale de ce terme, le substantif nécessite parfois d’être complété. Le substantif ainsi complété forme alors une locution nominale ; on parle également de syntagme nominal figé ou lexicalisé. Une telle locution est constituée de mots séparés par au moins une espace. Le mot principal d'un tel ensemble est nécessairement un substantif : chemin de fer, café crème, rose pompon, pois chiches, pommes de terre…
fr-->Certains syntagmes nominaux sont réduits pour former des sigles et des acronymes, ces réductions affectant l'orthographe et la prononciation. Cependant, même si le sigle ou l'acronyme représente un syntagme nominal, rien n'empêche qu'il soit employé comme une autre catégorie, en tant qu'adjectif ou adverbe… : par exemple, « des gens très BCBG » pour signifier « des gens très bon chic bon genre » où « BCBG » est un syntagme nominal à valeur d'adjectif épithète.
fr-->Morphologie du nom en français
fr-->Genre du nom
fr-->Nombre du nom
fr-->Syntaxe du nom en français
fr-->Fonction du nom
fr-->Satellites du syntagme nominal
fr-->Cet article est partiellement ou en totalité issu de l'article intitulé « Substantif » (voir la liste des auteurs).
fr-->Nature (grammaire)
fr-->Nom
fr-->David Nicolas, La distinction entre noms massifs et noms comptables : Aspects linguistiques et conceptuels, Leuven, Éditions Peeters, 2002, VI-240 p. (lire en ligne)
fr-->David Nicolas, « Massif / comptable », sur Sémanticlopédie, D. Godard, L. Roussarie et F. Corblin, 2006
fr--> Portail de la linguistique
es-->El término persona proviene del latín persōna, y éste probablemente del etrusco phersu (‘máscara del actor’, ‘personaje’), el cual —según el Diccionario de la lengua española— procede del griego πρóσωπον [prósôpon].[1]​ El concepto de persona es un concepto principalmente filosófico, que expresa la singularidad de cada individuo de la especie humana en contraposición al concepto filosófico de «naturaleza humana» que expresa lo supuestamente común que hay en ellos. Sin embargo, en Ética y en Derecho no solo existen personas de la especie humana.[2]​
es-->El significado actual de persona tiene su origen en las controversias cristológicas de los siglos IV y V. En el transcurso del debate entre las diferentes escuelas teológicas, se desarrollaron conceptos hasta entonces no conocidos. Se trataba de disponer de herramientas de pensamiento filosófico, sobre las que mantener un debate intelectual honesto y riguroso acerca de los dogmas referidos al Λóγος (Logos: «Palabra»), y que permitiesen esclarecer sus diferencias o similitudes con Dios Padre. Para ello la filosofía tomó prestado del teatro griego el término πρόσωπον [prósôpon], y lo convirtió en un término filosófico, definiendo al Λóγος (Logos) como Persona divina. Por afinidad, el concepto fue posteriormente aplicado al Espíritu Santo, a los ángeles y a los hombres.
es-->Aunque el concepto más común de «persona» es el de «ser dotado de razón, consciente de sí mismo y poseedor de una identidad propia», su significado puede tratarse desde diferentes perspectivas.
es-->Rationalis naturae individua substantia («substancia individual de naturaleza racional») es la definición clásica de Boecio que se caracteriza por tres notas: la sustancialidad, la individualidad y la racionalidad. En este sentido persona no es un nombre genérico ya que indica un «quién» y no un «qué»; tampoco designa una naturaleza común sino incomunicabilidad. Por su parte Tomás de Aquino se refiere a la persona con la sentencia persona significat id quod est perfectissimum in tota natura, scilicet subsistens in rationali natura («persona significa lo más perfecto de toda la naturaleza, es decir, el subsistente de naturaleza racional»)[3]​ insistiendo así en la incomunicabilidad en el modo de existir. Para Tomás de Aquino la distinción entre persona y naturaleza es la del todo y la parte, pues la naturaleza lo es de la persona, que es la que realmente subsiste. Ser persona es ser abierto a la trascendencia, a un más allá del mundo, es decir a Dios. Del estudio de la noción de persona surge la Antropología filosófica.
es-->En la modernidad tiene lugar un vuelco psicológico en la concepción de persona. El primer paso se da como consecuencia del nominalismo pero se observa ya con claridad en Descartes que no habla de persona sino de «yo». En la misma línea, para Locke persona ya no es un concepto metafísico pues no indica un ser o modo de ser, sino un estado en el que se encuentra a veces un ser. Por su parte, Kant denomina a la persona como aquel ser que es un fin en sí mismo. Si bien en Kant se vuelve a un concepto ontológico, no se trata de un ser abierto a la trascendencia, sino autónomo.
es-->Por su parte, el existencialismo vuelve a poner atención en la relevancia de este concepto. Para Kierkegaard, la persona no es solipsista /* Contexto filosófico */ más bien la salida de uno mismo —saltando al vacío— como entrega a Dios. Para Heidegger la persona como Dasein (el ahí del ser) no es ni una cosa, ni un objeto ni una sustancia sino que se define existencialmente por el sentimiento de la angustia cerrado a la trascendencia.
es-->En el siglo XX diversos pensadores —algunos de inspiración cristiana y en concreto tomista— han centrado su atención en la noción de persona dando lugar al llamado personalismo entre los que destacan: G. Marcel, M. Buber, M. Scheler, J. Maritain, E. Mounier, Von Hildebrand, R. Guardini, K. Wojtyla, E. Lévinas, etc. Leonardo Polo ha sugerido una interesante noción de persona como “carácter de además” a partir de una ampliación de los trascendentales del ser hacia lo que él llama Antropología Trascendental proponiendo la libertad y la co-existencia como trascendentales personales distintos de los metafísicos.
es-->Desde la óptica sociológica puede definirse persona como un ser sociable que vive y se desarrolla en sociedad, pero al mismo tiempo nunca deja de actuar con un carácter individual. Es decir somos “yo” y “nosotros” al mismo tiempo. Por eso algunos pensadores como Aristóteles definen al hombre como “animal sociable” y por tanto su naturaleza es ser social.
es-->Si nos atenemos a la fisiología, se puede identificar a la persona como un ser o individuo de la especie humana; como un hombre o mujer dotado/a de un conjunto de características físicas únicas que le permite diferenciarse de los demás.
es-->Desde el punto de vista psicológico, persona designa a un ser concreto, abarcando tanto sus aspectos físicos como psíquicos para definir su carácter singular y único. Percibe e interpreta el estado de ánimo, el carácter y la forma de actuar de las personas, además estudia las cualidades y facultades que tiene la persona, como la razón, los sentimientos y los valores que lo distingue de los demás seres.
es-->Son varias las dificultades del estudio de la persona humana estimadas insalvables para la psicología. Recordemos solo las mayores: la persona no es ni un objeto ni una manifestación susceptible de ser objetivada, sino manantial o estructura de actos; no es una realidad fenoménica ni una suma de cualidades, sino unidad singular inabarcable; no es formación hecha, definitiva, sino proceso concreto que termina solo con la muerte; por último, los actos que origina y que constituyen su realidad no se prestan a la reflexión psicológica, pues se dan de manera inmediata y concreta, sobre todo en la participación amorosa.
es-->Persona no humana
es-->Sujeto de Derecho internacional
es-->Homo sapiens
es-->Persona física
es-->Persona jurídica
es-->Persona (arquetipo)
es-->Personaje
es-->Sujeto (filosofía)
es-->Crosby, J. (1996). The selfhood of the human person, Catholic University of America Press, USA.
es-->Delgado, Honorio (1949). La persona humana desde el punto de vista psicológico. 
es-->Ferrer, Urbano (2002). ¿Qué significa ser persona?. Palabra. ISBN 9788482396767. 
es-->Sellés, Juan Fernando. (2007) Antropología para inconformes: una antropología abierta al futuro, Pamplona, Rialp, p. 530.
es-->Polo, Leonardo. (2010) Antropología Trascendental I: La persona humana, Pamplona, Eunsa, p. 237.
es-->Polo, Leonardo (1996). La persona y su crecimiento, Pamplona, Eunsa, p. 264.
es-->Spaemann, Robert. (2000) Personas. Acerca de la distinción entre algo y alguien, Pamplona, Eunsa.
es-->Torré, Abelardo (1997). Introducción al Derecho. Buenos Aires: Perrot. 
es--> Wikiquote alberga frases célebres de o sobre clases de personas. Wikiquote
es--> Wikcionario tiene definiciones y otra información sobre persona.Wikcionario
es-->El Diccionario de la Real Academia Española tiene una definición para persona .
de-->Eine Person ist ein durch seine individuellen Eigenschaften bzw. Eigenarten gekennzeichneter Mensch. Das Wort Person kommt aus persona (Latein) oder prosopon (πρόσωπον; Griechisch) und drückt als sozialphilosophischer Begriff die Einzigartigkeit jedes Individuums der Menschenart aus, im Gegensatz zu dem Begriff menschliche Natur, der die Gemeinsamkeiten der Individuen ausdrückt.
de-->Der Begriff Person wurde während der trinitarischen und christologosichen Diskussionen der 4. und 5. Jh. entfaltet. Während dieser theologischen Auseinandersetzungen waren einige philosophische Begriffe nötig, damit die Diskussionen auf einer allen theologischen Schulen gemeinsamen Basis gehalten werden konnten. Das Ziel der Diskussion war, die Relation (Beziehung), Ähnlichkeiten und Unterschiede zwischen dem Logos Λóγος/Verbum und Gott Vater festzulegen. Der philosophische Begriff von Person ergab sich aus dem Wort „prosopon“ (πρόσωπον) des griechischen Theaters. Daher wurden Christus (der Λóγος/Verbum) und Gott als verschiedene „göttliche Personen“ definiert. Dieser Begriff wurde später auf den Heiligen Geist, die Engel und alle menschliche Wesen angewendet.
de-->Die Herkunft des Wortes Person ist nicht vollständig geklärt; es existieren hierzu verschiedene Theorien. Fest steht lediglich, dass es im 13. Jahrhundert als person(e) aus lat. persona „Maske des Schauspielers“ ins Deutsche übernommen wurde. Der Ursprung des lateinischen Begriffes ist jedoch umstritten. Am bekanntesten ist die Ableitung von lat. per-sonare (kurzes -o-) für „durchtönen“ (nämlich die Stimme durch die Maske). Ein vergleichbarer Erklärungsversuch nimmt die Abstammung von per-sônare bzw. per-zônare (langes -o-) für „verkleiden“ (zu griech. ζώνη zônê ‚Gürtel‘) an. Diese Ad-hoc-Herleitungen werden jedoch stark angezweifelt. Der an der Lautgeschichte interessierte Etymologe Josef Justus Scaliger (* 1540, † 1609) entschied sich für perzonare (einen Gürtel anlegen), was allerdings keine rein lateinische Etymologie darstellt. Denn zona kommt aus dem Griechischen und bedeutet „Gürtel“.
de-->Manche Wissenschaftler halten den Begriff für eine Entlehnung aus dem neutestamentlichen griech. πρόσωπον prosôpon ‚Maske‘, ‚Rolle‘, ‚Mensch‘ (ältere Bedeutung: (An)Gesicht, Miene, Blick, äußere Gestalt, Aussehen).
de-->Einer anderen und von den meisten Etymologen und Philologen heute für wahrscheinlicher gehaltenen Theorie zufolge stammt er jedoch vom etruskischen Wort phersu für ‚Maske‘. Die Ableitung aus dem Etruskischen wird bereits seit Jahren als einzige Version von der Duden-Redaktion vertreten. Phersu war der Eigenname einer Gestalt aus der Unterwelt, die bei Leichenspielen auftrat und sich in einer für sie typischen Verkleidung zu erkennen gab.
de-->Person im philosophischen Sinn wird von manchen als das Wesen des Menschseins vor dem Hintergrund des abendländischen Denkhorizonts gesehen: Dem Menschen als Person wird eine gewisse Freiheit der Entscheidung und Verantwortlichkeit für sein Handeln zugeschrieben. Andere philosophische Strömungen sehen den Personenbegriff nicht beschränkt auf Menschen.
de-->In der klassischen Philosophie ist die Definition des Boethius der Ausgangspunkt des Verständnisses vom Menschen als Person: Persona est rationalis naturae individua substantia, d. h. Person ist die unteilbare („individuelle“) Substanz rationaler (vernünftiger) Natur. Danach liegt der Erscheinung des Menschen als denkendem Lebewesen ein sinnlich nicht wahrnehmbarer, d. h. metaphysischer Wesenskern zugrunde. Seine Definition wird jedoch in der Philosophie als unzureichend angesehen, weil sie den kategorialen Person-Begriff und seinen ontologischen Status nicht betrachte.
de-->„Person“ in diesem Sinne wurde in der mittelalterlichen Philosophie dann öfter mit dem Begriff „unsterbliche Seele“ identifiziert. In der christlichen Religion beispielsweise steht der Begriff der Person sogar für eines der zentralen Wesensmerkmale Gottes. In der Philosophie der Neuzeit (Aufklärung) wurde der Begriff Person als einer substanziellen Realität vielfältig kritisiert und seine metaphysische Dimension argumentativ bestritten. Seit dem 20. Jahrhundert ist nicht mehr von einer Substanz die Rede, sondern von Personalität im Sinne eines Existenzials.
de-->Immanuel Kant unterschied deutlich zwischen dem Begriff der Person als Vernunftwesen und der „unsterblichen Seele“ als reiner Vernunftbegriff. „Person ist dasjenige Subjekt, dessen Handlungen einer Zurechnung fähig sind.“ Eine Person folgt „keinen anderen Gesetzen als denen, die sie (entweder allen oder wenigstens zugleich mit anderen) sich selbst gibt.“
de-->In modernen philosophischen Strömungen sind Personen die Subjekte der Ethik. Manche Ethiker, so Peter Singer, unterscheiden zwischen Mensch und Person. Diskursethisch lasse sich dies so begründen, dass nur der Mensch als Person gelten kann, der in der Lage ist, sich im Diskurs zu äußern. Kritiker wie Robert Spaemann stellen Singers Unterscheidung zwischen Mensch und Person in Frage, besonders wegen der Graduierungsunmöglichkeit zwischen ‚etwas‘ und ‚jemandem‘; ihnen gilt die biologische Zugehörigkeit zur Gattung Mensch als alleiniges Kriterium für Personalität. Auch Vertreter des Naturrechts argumentieren, dass dem Menschen – durch seinen Geist – von Anfang an und in allen Situationen (also etwa auch im Koma) das Personsein und damit seine besondere Würde zukomme.
de-->Romano Guardini definierte: »Person ist sich selbst besitzender Geist. Sich selbst besitzend in der Eigengehörigkeit des Bewußtseins und der Freiheit; in der Eigengehörigkeit des einmaligen Soseins«.
de-->In besonderem Maße hat die Philosophie des Personalismus den Begriff Person definiert, nämlich nicht als Bewusstsein des Individuums von sich selbst, sondern als „aktive Subjektivität“ des Einzelnen, durch die er sich selbst hervorbringt. Dieser Status wird prinzipiell jedem Menschen zugesprochen; da es ein ethisch-moralisches Prinzip ist, kann es nicht veräußert werden: Der Mensch ist an sich immer Person und soll es zugleich werden, indem er immer mehr von seiner Freiheit Gebrauch macht und sich selbst bestimmt. Die Unterscheidung zwischen Person als Wesensbegriff und Persönlichkeit als Individuation ist unbedingt zu beachten; die Person des Menschen steht in der Hierarchie der Werte über allen anderen Werten, sei es die Persönlichkeit, die soziale Rolle, die Gemeinschaft oder das biologische Individuum.
de-->Die Christliche Soziallehre sieht in der Personalität neben der Solidarität, Subsidiarität sowie dem Gemeinwohl und der Gerechtigkeit eines der Prinzipien für ein gelingendes menschliches Zusammenleben in Gesellschaft und Staat.
de-->In der Psychologie wird Person synonym zu dem Begriff Individuum verwendet und ist somit Gegenstand jeglicher psychologischer Forschung (Differentielle Psychologie, Persönlichkeit, Einzelpsychologie), da Individuen selbe Merkmale aufweisen. Nach C. G. Jung ist die Person im Sinne der Dialektik „ein psychisches System, welches, im Falle der Einwirkung auf eine andere Person, mit einem anderen psychischen System in Wechselwirkung tritt.“
de-->Person im juristischen Sinn ist der Oberbegriff für natürliche Personen und juristische Personen. Beide Rechtssubjekte sind Träger von Rechten und Pflichten; ihnen ist kraft Gesetzes Rechtsfähigkeit verliehen. Außerdem wird die Person als (Staats-)Bürger oder Staatsangehöriger, dem juristisch ein bestimmtes verfassungsrechtlich festgelegtes Subjektsein zugeordnet wird, verstanden.
de-->Die Rechtswissenschaft unterscheidet bei den Rechtssubjekten zwischen natürlicher und juristischer Person: Natürliche Person als abstrakter Rechtsbegriff umfasst die lebenden Menschen, während unter einer juristischen Person eine rechtlich verselbständigte und mit eigener Rechtsfähigkeit ausgestattete Personenmehrheit (Organisation) verstanden wird. Aus der Natur der juristischen Person ergeben sich für ihre Rechtsfähigkeit bestimmte Einschränkungen. Während juristische Personen im Zivilrechtsverkehr rechtsfähig, bestimmt sich ihre Grundrechtsfähigkeit nach Art. 19 III GG. Demzufolge können juristische Personen Träger von Grundrechten sein, wie sie auf diese ihrem Wesen nach anwendbar sind, was bei gewissen Grundrechten wie Art. 6 GG oder Art. 2 II GG ausgeschlossen ist. Im Umkehrschluss bedeutet dies, dass den natürlichen Personen uneingeschränkte Grundrechtsfähigkeit zukommt.
de-->Es wird diskutiert, ob sogenannte autonome Maschinen den rechtlichen Status von elektronischen Personen (E-Person) bekommen sollen. Ein solcher Schritt hätte unter Umständen zur Folge, dass solche Maschinen Rechte und Pflichten hätten und somit haftbar wären sowie sanktioniert und bestraft werden können müssen. Ferner wäre es möglicherweise illegal, solche Maschinen abzuschalten. Als Ausweg ist in der Diskussion, solche Maschinen nicht als autonom, sondern als (voll-)automatisch oder zumindest nur als teilautonom zu bezeichnen.
de-->Person im soziologischen Sinn bezeichnet ein Individuum, einen Menschen, der soziologisch verschiedene Rollen einnimmt, so z. B. als Eltern- und Geschwisterteil, ein Amt (z. B. als Beamter, Richter), einen Beruf, eine Herkunft (z. B. Volksgruppenzugehörigkeit, Ethnie wie z. B. Kurde, Same, Baske usw.).
de-->In der klassischen Studie Ferdinand Tönnies’ von 1887 Gemeinschaft und Gesellschaft ist „Person“ der Träger sozialer Rollen, insofern dieser die „Gesellschaft“ mit anderen zu eigenem Vorteil willentlich sucht; der Begriff nähert sich damit Marx’ „Charaktermaske“ an. Tönnies hierzu: „Zum Begriff der Person kann von keinen anderen empirischen Subjekten abgezogen werden, außer von den einzelnen Menschen, welche begriffen werden, insofern als jeder ein [...] in Gedanken wollender ist, folglich gibt es insoweit wirkliche und natürliche Personen, als Menschen vorhanden sind, welche sich als solche vorstellen, diese 'Rolle' übernehmen und spielen, oder den 'Charakter' einer Person wie eine Maske vor ihr Antlitz halten.“
de-->Der Begriff „Person“ steht bei Tönnies dem Begriff „Selbst“ gegenüber: Letzteres benennt das Selbstbild des Einzelnen, insofern er die „Gemeinschaft“ mit anderen sucht, um sich ihr willentlich einzuordnen.
de-->Die Systemtheorie von Niklas Luhmann trennt klar zwischen den Konzepten „Mensch“ und „Person“. Letztere gilt als – zumindest potentiell – unsterblich.
de-->Martin Brasser: Person. Philosophische Texte von der Antike bis zur Gegenwart. Reclam, Ditzingen 1999, ISBN 3-15-018024-4.
de-->Clemens Breuer: Person von Anfang an? Der Mensch aus der Retorte und die Frage nach dem Beginn des menschlichen Lebens. 2. Auflage, Schöningh, Paderborn/Wien/München/Zürich 2003, ISBN 3-506-70236-X.
de-->Roland Harweg: Ein Mensch, eine Person und jemand. In: Zeitschrift für deutsche Sprache 27, 1971, S. 101–112.
de-->Klaus Robra: Und weil der Mensch Person ist … Person-Begriff und Personalismus im Zeitalter der (Welt-)Krisen. Die Blaue Eule, Essen 2003, ISBN 3-89924-069-3.
de-->Dieter Sturma (Hg.): Person. Philosophiegeschichte – Theoretische Philosophie – Praktische Philosophie. Mentis, Paderborn 2001, ISBN 3-89785-301-9.
de-->Roland Kipke: Mensch und Person. Der Begriff der Person in der Bioethik und die Frage nach dem Lebensrecht aller Menschen. Logos, Berlin 2001.
de-->Robert Spaemann: Personen. Versuche über den Unterschied zwischen 'etwas' und 'jemand'. Klett-Cotta, Stuttgart 1996, 3. Auflage 2006, ISBN 978-3-608-91813-7.
de-->Hans-Dieter Spengler, Benedikt Forschner, Michael Mirschberger (Hrsg.): Die Idee der Person als römisches Erbe? Verlag der Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen 2016, ISBN 978-3-944057-53-8.
de-->Dieter Teichert: Personen und Identitäten. De Gruyter Verlag, Berlin 1999, ISBN 978-3-11-016405-3.
de-->Joachim Wiesner: Der Person-Begriff als sprachwissenschaftliches Problem: Voraussetzungen - Methoden - Forschungsziele. In: Zeitschrift für deutsche Sprache, Band 25, 1969, S. 49–64.
de-->theologie-systematisch.de Aktuelle Literatur zum Person-Verständnis des Menschen
de-->Person im Wörterbuch der philosophischen Grundbegriffe von Friedrich Kirchner (1907)
it-->In diritto, una persona fisica è un essere umano dotato di capacità giuridica, quindi soggetto di diritto.
it-->Si possono definire persone fisiche tutti gli esseri umani nati vivi, cioè che hanno respirato almeno una volta. Negli ordinamenti statali attuali la soggettività giuridica è riconosciuta a tutti gli esseri umani; in ordinamenti del passato, invece, esistevano esseri umani ai quali non era attribuita alcuna soggettività giuridica: gli schiavi.
it-->La soggettività giuridica delle persone fisiche non è sempre presente negli ordinamenti diversi da quelli statali: ad esempio, nell'ordinamento internazionale sono soggetti di diritto gli stati e le organizzazioni internazionali, ma non le persone fisiche (anche se, secondo alcuni autori, lo sarebbero divenute nei tempi più recenti, in considerazione del fatto che molte norme del diritto internazionale umanitario sembrano avere come destinatari non soltanto gli stati ma anche le persone fisiche).
it-->Nell'ordinamento italiano sono persone fisiche gli esseri umani che con la loro nascita diventano soggetti rilevanti ai fini del diritto, in quanto secondo l'articolo 1 del codice civile divengono titolari di diritti e doveri, cioè acquisiscono la capacità giuridica.
it-->Con il raggiungimento della maggiore età, 18 anni per l'ordinamento italiano, la persona fisica acquisisce la capacità di agire, cioè la possibilità di porre in essere atti rilevanti ai fini giuridici. Al momento della morte dell'individuo si estingue anche la sua soggettività giuridica.
it-->Alpa e Ansaldo, Le persone fisiche, in Il codice civile, commentario diretto da Schlesinger, 1996
it-->Romboli, Breccia, De Vita, Persone fisiche, 1988
it-->Persona giuridica
it-->Persona fisica, in Thesaurus del Nuovo soggettario, BNCF, marzo 2013. 
it-->Codice Civile italiano su Wikisource
nl-->De mens (wetenschappelijke naam: Homo sapiens) is een tweevoetige primatensoort uit de familie Hominidae.
nl-->Het woord "mens" (Duits Mensch, Zweeds människa, Deens menneske) is een variant van "man" (Duits Mann, Engels man), dat uiteindelijk zou teruggaan op een Indo-Europese stam *man-: "denken" of *ma-: "meten". Deze stam treft men aan in Latijn mens, mentis: "geest, verstand" (vergelijk Engels mind), memoria: "geheugen, herinnering", Grieks menos: "geest", mnèmè: "geheugen", Sanskriet man-: "denken, geest", Russisch mnit' "menen, denken". Het Iraanse woord voor "ik" (voornaamwoord) is man. In het Oudindisch bestaat tevens Manu: "(oer-)mens", modern Hindi manusha: "mens, man". Deze oerbetekenis kreeg de wetenschappelijke naam Homo sapiens (Latijn: "verstandige" of "wijze" mens).
nl-->De naam Homo sapiens werd in 1758 gepubliceerd door Carl Linnaeus in de tiende druk van Systema naturae. Bij publicatie van de naam noemde Linnaeus vijf ondersoorten of variëteiten: ferus (de wilde mens), var. α americanus, var. β europaeus, var. γ asiaticus en var. δ afer. Het onderscheid tussen de laatste vier was voornamelijk de kleur: rufus (rood), albus (wit), luridus (bleekgeel) en niger (zwart). Tegenwoordig wordt soms geopteerd om te spreken over de ondersoort Homo sapiens sapiens als het over de mens gaat. Dit laat duidelijker het onderscheid zien met de (mogelijke) ondersoorten Homo sapiens diluvialis (cro-magnonmens) en Homo sapiens idaltu, beide uitgestorven.
nl-->De mens is over de hele wereld verspreid en op alle continenten behalve Antarctica komen grote populaties voor. In juli 2008 was het totale aantal mensen op Aarde groter dan 6,7 miljard individuen, eind oktober 2011 telde de Aarde een totaal van 7 miljard levende mensen. Er is slechts één nog levende ondersoort en dat is Homo sapiens sapiens.
nl-->Mensen zijn, evenals de meeste andere primaten, sociaal van aard. Ze zijn bijzonder bedreven in het gebruik van communicatiemiddelen voor zelfexpressie, uitwisseling van ideeën en organisatie. Mensen creëren complexe sociale structuren, die bestaan uit talrijke samenwerkende en concurrerende groepen, die uiteenlopen van families tot naties. Wat de samenleving van mensen uniek maakt, is dat het belang van verwantschap een veel minder dominante rol speelt. Mensen leven grotendeels met elkaar samen op niet-verwante basis, waardoor een individu deel kan uitmaken van verschillende groepen, en binnen iedere groep een andere rol kan innemen.
nl-->De sociale interacties tussen mensen hebben een grote variëteit aan tradities, rituelen, ethiek, normen, waarden, en wetten tot stand gebracht, die samen de basis vormen voor de menselijke samenleving.
nl-->De menselijke hersenen zijn zeer goed ontwikkeld, waarmee hij in staat is tot abstract nadenken, taal, introspectie, probleemoplossing en emotie. Dankzij zijn intelligentie en rechtopstaande houding, waardoor de armen vrij zijn om voorwerpen op te pakken en te bewerken, is de mens veel meer dan andere soorten in staat gereedschappen te gebruiken. De mens wordt door zichzelf gezien als de meest intelligente levensvorm op aarde. Dierlijke cognitie is echter niet beperkt tot de mens, maar is ook vastgesteld bij zoogdieren als olifanten en walvisachtigen zoals dolfijnen en orka's. Of deze een soortgelijk zelfbewustzijn en tijdsbesef hebben zoals de mens is een open vraag. Mensen zijn evenals andere soorten bevattelijk voor lichamelijke ziekten zoals kanker en geestelijke stoornissen, zoals fobieën, depressie en dergelijke.
nl-->Vergeleken met veel andere diersoorten beslaat de bestaansgeschiedenis van de mens een relatief korte periode.
nl-->De tijdslijn voor het ontstaan van de vroege moderne mens als soort is nog onduidelijk. Op basis van DNA-onderzoek werd verondersteld dat de eerste moderne mensen zo'n 200.000 jaar geleden ontstonden in Oost-Afrika. De vondst van resten van moderne mensen bij Jebel Irhoud, nabij het tegenwoordige Marrakesh in Noordwest-Afrika, waarover in 2017 werd gepubliceerd, verlegt het begin van die tijdlijn mogelijk naar 300.000 jaar geleden.
nl-->De moderne mens kwam als cro-magnonmens circa 50.000 tot 40.000 jaar geleden naar Europa, maar bestond in Afrika al langer. Deze 'Afrikanen' worden wel gezien als voorlopers van de cro-magnonmens. Met de vondst van twee schedels bij de Omo-rivier in 1967 werd deze theorie onderbouwd. Wetenschappers hadden deze twee schedels op 130.000 jaar gedateerd. Later onderzoek leek aan te tonen dat twee schedels van Homo sapiens mogelijk veel ouder (195.000 jaar) waren.
nl-->Sommigen beweren, naar aanleiding van enkele vondsten in China, dat Homo sapiens op verschillende plaatsen in de wereld tot ontwikkeling is gekomen, niet alleen in Afrika. DNA onderzoek ondersteunt echter de theorie dat de mens (grotendeels) uit Afrika afkomstig is. Bij vulkaanuitbarstingen op Sumatra zouden 70.000 jaar geleden de toen bestaande mensensoorten grotendeels zijn uitgestorven, alleen in het zuiden van Afrika overleefden zo'n 12.000 moderne mensen. Van hen zouden alle 7 miljard nu levende mensen afstammen.
nl-->Naast morfologie toont ook genetica aan dat de mens een primaat is, een geslacht uit de superfamilie der mensapen (Hominoidea), waartoe ook orang-oetans, bonobo's, gorilla's en chimpansees en de verschillende soorten gibbons behoren. De mens is de enige nog levende soort uit het geslacht Homo, hoewel er wel stemmen op zijn gegaan om de mens met de bonobo en de chimpansee in één geslacht te plaatsen.
nl-->Peter Grünwald van het CWI schat dat sinds het ontstaan van de mens er zo'n 107,5 miljard mensen zijn geboren.
nl-->Een mens behoort tot de gewervelden en beschikt onder meer over twee benen, twee armen en een hoofd. Het geraamte van de mens is inwendig. Voorziening van de cellen van het menselijk lichaam van de juiste voedingsstoffen geschiedt door een apart stelsel, de bloedsomloop, dat wordt 'aangedreven' door het hart. Via de longen wordt het bloed voorzien van zuurstof, en via de maag en darmen van andere noodzakelijke stoffen. Afvoer van afvalstoffen vindt plaats door deze vanuit het bloed door de nieren samen met water af te scheiden via de blaas, en door niet door de darmen opgenomen stoffen af te voeren via de endeldarm.
nl-->Biologisch gezien bestaan er naar moderne inzichten binnen de soort Homo sapiens geen rassen en algemeen gelden dergelijke indelingen in de wetenschap als verouderd. De genetische verschillen binnen de soort kenmerken zich enkel door kleine klimatologische aanpassingen. Een blanke huidskleur is bijvoorbeeld een voordelige aanpassing bij het weinige zonlicht in het noorden, dat tot gebrek aan vitamine D leidde (in de tropen is een lichte huid juist in het nadeel).
nl-->De manier waarop mensen elkaar benaderen tijdens geslachtsgemeenschap is voor het grootste gedeelte uniek in de dierenwereld. Behalve de bonobo en de gorilla zijn mensen de enige primaten die elkaar ook van de voorkant ontvangen. De mens is levendbarend; doorgaans wordt één baby, na een zwangerschap van ongeveer 40 weken (9 maanden) geboren met het achterhoofd als voorliggend deel. Tweelingen en uitzonderlijk meerlingen komen ook voor. De zuigeling is bij de geboorte nog erg hulpbehoevend en wordt een aantal maanden tot jaren gezoogd.
nl-->De meeste andere jonge zoogdieren zijn na de geboorte minder afhankelijk van de ouders dan de mens, die pas na ongeveer een jaar kan lopen. Met twee jaar kan een kind spreken en het ontwikkelt zich vanaf dat moment veel sneller dan bij andere dieren. De hulpbehoevendheid bij de geboorte heeft vermoedelijk te maken met de grote schedel die een langere zwangerschap gevaarlijk zou maken voor moeder en kind.
nl-->Tijdens de evolutie van de mens is de gemiddelde leeftijd van volwassenen geleidelijk aan langer geworden. Omstreeks 30.000 jaar geleden is er grote versnelling in deze evolutie gekomen en begonnen grootouders een grote rol te spelen in de opvoeding van de kleinkinderen. De levensverwachting is met de verbetering van de leefomstandigheden en gezondheidszorg gestegen. Met de allerbeste genen en gunstigste leefomstandigheden is de maximale haalbare leeftijd ongeveer 120 jaar. De langst levende persoon over wie betrouwbare documentatie bestaat, is Jeanne-Louise Calment die 122 jaar en 5 maanden heeft geleefd.
nl-->Van nature is de mens een omnivoor. Aanvankelijk zochten de primitieve mensen hun voedsel als jagers en verzamelaars. Men vermoedt dat de jacht vooral toevertrouwd werd aan mannen, terwijl de vrouwen van een groep de kleine kinderen beschermden en vruchten of eetbare zaden, wortels en bladeren en honing verzamelden. Het verzamelen van voedsel in de wilde natuur was zeer belangrijk. Er was immers niet elke dag vlees of vis beschikbaar om de honger te stillen. Het spreekt vanzelf dat de mens voor de opkomst van de landbouw een kwetsbaar bestaan leidde, en kannibalisme kwam in de vroege prehistorie zeker voor. Perioden van voedselgebrek waren een ramp voor een familie of stam, omdat ondervoede mensen te weinig energie hadden om zich te verdedigen tegen roofdieren of vijandige buren.
nl-->De landbouw maakte de ontwikkeling van steden en een hogere vorm van beschaving mogelijk. Er ontstond handel in voedingsmiddelen en deze evoluties veranderden het voedselpatroon. Wat men in de Oudheid vooral at verschilde van land tot land. Zo was vlees in het oude Griekenland een luxeproduct, maar in gebieden die zeer geschikt waren voor veeteelt een gewone vorm van voedsel.
nl-->In de twintigste eeuw is het voedselpatroon sterk veranderd. De mens is sindsdien steeds meer koolhydraten gaan eten. Toegevoegde suikers, sappen, witte rijst en brood worden in toenemende mate geconsumeerd. Tevens eet de mens gemiddeld 10 gram zout per dag. Dit komt vooral door kaas, brood, chips, zoutjes, kant-en-klaarmaaltijden, koekjes, snoep, sauzen en ijs.
nl-->De mensheid is een verzamelnaam voor alle mensen ter wereld. De mens is in staat over zichzelf na te denken en zich in anderen te kunnen verplaatsen. Ook kan de mensheid technologieën ontwikkelen en nadenken over en oplossingen vinden voor economische en wetenschappelijke vraagstukken. De mens is meer dan enig andere diersoort in staat om zijn leefomgeving te veranderen, ten goede van zichzelf, maar zeker ook ten kwade. Met dammen en dijken beheerst de mens de loop van het water, en met de bouw van woningen, die vaak in groten getale bij elkaar te vinden zijn en zo dorpen of steden vormen, weet de mens zich te beschermen tegen het klimaat. Landbouw stelt mensen in staat de voedselproductie te beheersen. De geneeskunde stelt mensen in staat om zware ziekten te boven te komen. Een ziekte als pokken is door vaccinatie uitgeroeid.
nl-->Mensen kennen een cultuur, die te herkennen is aan uiterlijk, bestuur, tradities, gebruiken, taal, religie, rijkdom en eetgewoonten. Culturen verschillen over het algemeen per regio, alhoewel verscheidene culturen ook naast elkaar voorkomen. Een cultuur kan een aantal subculturen bevatten, die elk hun eigen gewoontes, etc. hebben. Sommige culturen botsen met elkaar vanwege onverenigbare ideeën. Vele oorlogen hebben dan ook hun oorzaak in het verschil tussen enkele culturen. Dit heeft in sommige gevallen zelfs geleid tot genocide.
nl-->Mensen hebben talen ontwikkeld waarmee men met anderen kan communiceren. Door middel van technologische ontwikkelingen in de twintigste eeuw op het gebied van telecommunicatie is de mens in staat om wereldwijd met andere mensen te communiceren.
nl-->De meeste mensen, zowel die vroeger leefden, als die nu op aarde zijn, hebben een geloof. Dat kan in een georganiseerd verband zijn, zoals het christendom de islam of het hindoeïsme of het kan een particuliere persoonlijke overtuiging zijn.
nl-->Mede door de ontwikkeling van technologie is de menselijke populatie zeer groot. Rond november 2011 leefden er zo'n 7 miljard mensen op aarde. Dit heeft echter ook nadelige gevolgen voor de natuur. Natuurgebieden maken plaats voor landbouwgebieden, steden, wegen en andere menselijke bouwsels. Lucht, grond en water raken vervuild en veel plant- en diersoorten worden met uitsterven bedreigd. Andere diersoorten weten echter weer van de mens te profiteren. Cultuurvolgers als de bruine rat, huismuis, huismus en stadsduif en huis- en gedomesticeerde dieren als hond, kat, rund en kip hebben zich mede dankzij de mens over de aarde weten te verspreiden.
nl-->Meer dan 90% van de tijd dat de moderne mens bestaat, leefde hij in kleine groepen jager-verzamelaars. Doordat mensen de mogelijkheid hadden informatie (bijvoorbeeld in de vorm van memes) aan de volgende generatie door te geven ging de culturele evolutie steeds sneller. Rond 10.000 jaar geleden begonnen de bewoners van de Vruchtbare Sikkel de domesticatie van dieren en planten, wat leidde tot een grote verandering in levensstijl, die de neolithische revolutie wordt genoemd. Met zijn nieuwe levensstijl kreeg de mens een enorme invloed op andere soorten en door het grootschalig ontbossen om nieuw landbouwgebied te krijgen zelfs op het klimaat. Zo is het aandeel broeikasgassen (vooral methaan, maar ook koolstofdioxide) met hun grote invloed op het klimaat al rond de introductie van de landbouw (in afwijking met eerdere interglacialen) gaan stijgen. Hoewel de mens in geïsoleerde gebieden waar weinig domesticeerbare planten konden groeien nomadisch bleef, ontstonden elders permanente woonplaatsen. Dankzij steeds effectievere landbouwmethoden konden steeds meer mensen samenleven op kleine oppervlakten, waardoor georganiseerdere vormen van samenleving nodig werden waarin arbeidsdeling optrad. Het overschot aan voedsel maakte een heersende klasse mogelijk, en de eerste beschavingen ontstonden in Egypte, de Indusvallei en Mesopotamië rond 6000 jaar geleden.
nl-->Doordat de artificiële geheugensystemen die in de oude steentijd waren ontstaan zich ontwikkelden tot het schrift kon informatie nog effectiever worden doorgegeven. Misschien was het doordat de mens niet langer al zijn tijd in het verzamelen van voedsel hoefde te steken, dat hij zich bezig kon gaan houden met de ontwikkeling van religie, technologie en de eerste wetenschap. Beschavingen ontstonden overal ter wereld en dreven onderling handel of voerden oorlog. De groei van de menselijke kennis en technologie ging gestaag door, maar raakte in Europa in een stroomversnelling met de wetenschappelijke revolutie en later de industriële revolutie. Dit leverde de bewoners van dit continent gedurende enkele eeuwen politieke en militaire dominantie over de rest van de wereld op, maar deze dominantie verdween weer tijdens de 20e eeuw hoewel de culturele invloed van de Europese beschaving, beter bekend als de westerse cultuur, alleen maar groter lijkt te worden. Tegelijkertijd zorgden de nieuwe westerse technologieën voor een explosieve bevolkingsgroei, waardoor de wereldbevolking volgens VN tussen 1750 en 2000 toenam van nog geen 800 miljoen tot 6 miljard. De mens krijgt door bevolkingsgroei en nieuwe technologieën een steeds grotere invloed op de chemische, klimatologische en ecologische processen op Aarde. Door de globalisering en toegenomen internationale samenwerking raken verschillende menselijke culturen over de hele wereld tegelijkertijd steeds afhankelijker van elkaar. Er is, naast de behoefte aan behoud van eigenheid, ook een toenemende versmelting van culturen, economische en politieke structuren waar te nemen.
nl-->Enkele-oorspronghypothese
nl-->Homo (geslacht)
nl-->Menselijk ras
nl-->Multiregionaal model
en-->The world is the planet Earth and all life upon it, including human civilization. In a philosophical context, the world is the whole of the physical Universe, or an ontological world. In a theological context, the world is the material or the profane sphere, as opposed to the celestial, spiritual, transcendent or sacred. The "end of the world" refers to scenarios of the final end of human history, often in religious contexts.
en-->History of the world is commonly understood as spanning the major geopolitical developments of about five millennia, from the first civilizations to the present. In terms such as world religion, world language, world government, and world war, world suggests international or intercontinental scope without necessarily implying participation of the entire world.
en-->World population is the sum of all human populations at any time; similarly, world economy is the sum of the economies of all societies or countries, especially in the context of globalization. Terms like world championship, gross world product, world flags imply the sum or combination of all current-day sovereign states.
en-->The English word world comes from the Old English weorold (-uld), weorld, worold (-uld, -eld), a compound of wer "man" and eld "age," which thus means roughly "Age of Man." The Old English is a reflex of the Common Germanic *wira-alđiz, also reflected in Old Saxon werold, Old Dutch werilt, Old High German weralt, Old Frisian warld and Old Norse verǫld (whence the Icelandic veröld).
en-->The corresponding word in Latin is mundus, literally "clean, elegant", itself a loan translation of Greek cosmos "orderly arrangement." While the Germanic word thus reflects a mythological notion of a "domain of Man" (compare Midgard), presumably as opposed to the divine sphere on the one hand and the chthonic sphere of the underworld on the other, the Greco-Latin term expresses a notion of creation as an act of establishing order out of chaos.
en-->'World' distinguishes the entire planet or population from any particular country or region: world affairs pertain not just to one place but to the whole world, and world history is a field of history that examines events from a global (rather than a national or a regional) perspective. Earth, on the other hand, refers to the planet as a physical entity, and distinguishes it from other planets and physical objects.
en-->'World' was also classically used to mean the material universe, or the cosmos: "The worlde is an apte frame of heauen and earthe, and all other naturall thinges contained in them."  The earth was often described as 'the center of the world'.
en-->'World' can also be used attributively, to mean 'global', 'relating to the whole world', forming usages such as world community or world canonical texts.
en-->By extension, a 'world' may refer to any planet or heavenly body, especially when it is thought of as inhabited, especially in the context of science fiction or futurology.
en-->'World', in its original sense, when qualified, can also refer to a particular domain of human experience.
en-->The world of work describes paid work and the pursuit of a career, in all its social aspects, to distinguish it from home life and academic study.
en-->The fashion world describes the environment of the designers, fashion houses and consumers that make up the fashion industry.
en-->historically, the New World vs. the Old World, referring to the parts of the world colonized in the wake of the age of discovery. Now mostly used in zoology and botany, as in New World monkey.
en-->In philosophy, the term world has several possible meanings. In some contexts, it refers to everything that makes up reality or the physical universe. In others, it can mean have a specific ontological sense (see world disclosure). While clarifying the concept of world has arguably always been among the basic tasks of Western philosophy, this theme appears to have been raised explicitly only at the start of the twentieth century and has been the subject of continuous debate. The question of what the world is has by no means been settled.
en-->The traditional interpretation of Parmenides' work is that he argued that the everyday perception of reality of the physical world (as described in doxa) is mistaken, and that the reality of the world is 'One Being' (as described in aletheia): an unchanging, ungenerated, indestructible whole.
en-->In his Allegory of the Cave, Plato distinguishes between forms and ideas and imagines two distinct worlds: the sensible world and the intelligible world.
en-->In Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel's philosophy of history, the expression Weltgeschichte ist Weltgericht (World History is a tribunal that judges the World) is used to assert the view that History is what judges men, their actions and their opinions. Science is born from the desire to transform the World in relation to Man; its final end is technical application.
en-->The World as Will and Representation is the central work of Arthur Schopenhauer. Schopenhauer saw the human will as our one window to the world behind the representation; the Kantian thing-in-itself. He believed, therefore, that we could gain knowledge about the thing-in-itself, something Kant said was impossible, since the rest of the relationship between representation and thing-in-itself could be understood by analogy to the relationship between human will and human body.
en-->Two definitions that were both put forward in the 1920s, however, suggest the range of available opinion. "The world is everything that is the case," wrote Ludwig Wittgenstein in his influential Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, first published in 1922. This definition would serve as the basis of logical positivism, with its assumption that there is exactly one world, consisting of the totality of facts, regardless of the interpretations that individual people may make of them.
en-->Martin Heidegger, meanwhile, argued that "the surrounding world is different for each of us, and notwithstanding that we move about in a common world". The world, for Heidegger, was that into which we are always already "thrown" and with which we, as beings-in-the-world, must come to terms. His conception of "world disclosure" was most notably elaborated in his 1927 work Being and Time.
en-->In response, Sigmund Freud proposed that we do not move about in a common world, but a common thought process. He believed that all the actions of a person are motivated by one thing: lust. This led to numerous theories about reactionary consciousness.
en-->Some philosophers, often inspired by David Lewis, argue that metaphysical concepts such as possibility, probability, and necessity are best analyzed by comparing the world to a range of possible worlds; a view commonly known as modal realism.
en-->Mythological cosmologies often depict the world as centered on an axis mundi and delimited by a boundary such as a world ocean, a world serpent or similar. In some religions, worldliness (also called carnality) is that which relates to this world as opposed to other worlds or realms.
en-->In Buddhism, the world means society, as distinct from the monastery. It refers to the material world, and to worldly gain such as wealth, reputation, jobs, and war. The spiritual world would be the path to enlightenment, and changes would be sought in what we could call the psychological realm.
en-->In Christianity, the term often connotes the concept of the fallen and corrupt world order of human society, in contrast to the World to Come. The world is frequently cited alongside the flesh and the Devil as a source of temptation that Christians should flee. Monks speak of striving to be "in this world, but not of this world"—as Jesus said—and the term "worldhood" has been distinguished from "monkhood", the former being the status of merchants, princes, and others who deal with "worldly" things.
en-->This view is clearly expressed by king Alfred the Great of England (d. 899) in his famous Preface to the Cura Pastoralis:
en-->"Therefore I command you to do as I believe you are willing to do, that you free yourself from worldly affairs (Old English: woruldðinga) as often as you can, so that wherever you can establish that wisdom that God gave you, you establish it. Consider what punishments befell us in this world when we neither loved wisdom at all ourselves, nor transmitted it to other men; we had the name alone that we were Christians, and very few had the practices."
en-->Although Hebrew and Greek words meaning "world" are used in Scripture with the normal variety of senses, many examples of its use in this particular sense can be found in the teachings of Jesus according to the Gospel of John, e.g. 7:7, 8:23, 12:25, 14:17, 15:18-19, 17:6-25, 18:36. For contrast, a relatively newer concept is Catholic imagination.
en-->Contemptus mundi is the name given to the recognition that the world, in all its vanity, is nothing more than a futile attempt to hide from God by stifling our desire for the good and the holy. This view has been criticized as a "pastoral of fear" by modern historian Jean Delumeau.
en-->During the Second Vatican Council, there was a novel attempt to develop a positive theological view of the World, which is illustrated by the pastoral optimism of the constitutions Gaudium et spes, Lumen gentium, Unitatis redintegratio and Dignitatis humanae.
en-->In Eastern Christian monasticism or asceticism the world of mankind is driven by passions. Therefore, the passions of the World are simply called "the world". Each of these passions are a link to the world of mankind or order of human society. Each of these passions must be overcome in order for a person to receive salvation (theosis). The process of theosis is a personal relationship with God. This understanding is taught within the works of ascetics like Evagrius Ponticus, and the most seminal ascetic works read most widely by Eastern Christians, the Philokalia and the Ladder of Divine Ascent (the works of Evagrius and John Climacus are also contained within the Philokalia). At the highest level of world transcendence is hesychasm which culminates into the Vision of God.
en-->Orbis Catholicus is a Latin phrase meaning Catholic world, per the expression Urbi et Orbi, and refers to that area of Christendom under papal supremacy. It is somewhat similar to the phrases secular world, Jewish world and Islamic world.
en-->Dunya derives from the root word "dana" that means to bring near. In that sense, "dunya" is "what is brought near".
en-->Globe
en-->List of sovereign states
en-->Universe
en-->Ocean
en--> Media related to World at Wikimedia Commons
en--> Quotations related to World at Wikiquote
en-->"World". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency.
fr-->Il existe plusieurs visions du terme :
fr-->Le monde est la matière, l'espace et les phénomènes qui nous sont accessibles par les sens, l'expérience ou la raison. Le sens le plus courant désigne notre planète, la Terre, avec ses habitants, et son environnement plus ou moins naturel. Le sens étendu désigne l'univers dans son ensemble.
fr-->Un monde (synonymes : milieu, environnement) est l'espace dans lequel est la personne ou l'objet dont on parle et tout ce que cet espace contient. Par exemple : le monde de quelqu'un (son habitat ou le monde de son esprit), le monde du travail, etc. Dans ce sens-là, on ne vit pas tous dans le même monde.
fr-->Un Monde est la représentation culturelle de l'espace dans lequel évolue un groupe. Cette représentation est historiquement, géographiquement, culturellement datée. Elle dépend à la fois de l'observateur et de l'observé.
fr-->La représentation physique, scientifique du monde est l'ensemble des données géodésiques, astronomiques, géographiques, naturelles, historiques, symboliques ou monumentales, et bien sûr aussi linguistiques, qui participent à la vie d'un groupe humain.
fr-->Pour la représentation géodésique :
fr-->La représentation du monde physique a évolué dans l'histoire, par suite d'échanges entre les civilisations.
fr-->Dans les temps les plus anciens de l'Histoire, le monde était compris comme l'ensemble des terres et des zones navigables connues (nommé œkoumène).
fr-->Dans les débuts des sciences grecques, les représentations étaient diverses. À l'école ionienne de Milet, on pensait que la Terre était plate. Le géographe Anaximandre l'imaginait comme un tambour, et donna même une estimation de son épaisseur.
fr-->Vers la même époque, en revanche, Pythagore, et ensuite Parménide (philosophe grec présocratique de l'école éléatique), pensaient que la Terre était sphérique.
fr-->Platon et Aristote, et la plupart des grands philosophes grecs de la période classique et des périodes ultérieures, se rangèrent à cette représentation sphérique de la Terre, de même, bien sûr, que les astronomes (Eudoxe, Ératosthène, Hipparque, Ptolémée...), qui la fondèrent sur des bases plus scientifiques que philosophiques.
fr-->Le monde connu occupe une surface restreinte de la sphère terrestre aussi le géographe Strabon considère qu'il est légitime et plus pratique, compte tenu de la dimension que devrait avoir la sphère pour que soient figurés les détails de la géographie, de le représenter sur une surface plane, sur une carte géographique. Marinos de Tyr et Ptolémée développent l’usage des coordonnées géographiques pour obtenir des cartes plus précises.
fr-->Durant le Moyen-âge en Occident, la perte de la pratique du Grec et la disparition de certains textes classiques entraînent un oubli des avancées scientifique de l'Antiquité.
fr-->Néanmoins, en Occident latin, grâce à la traduction du Timée, la rotondité de la Terre reste communément admise par les lettrés.
fr-->Les progrès dans la représentation cartographique réalisés par Marinos de Tyr et Ptolémée restent méconnus et la carte en T, utilisée pour représenter le monde connu, reprend le modèle circulaire de la carte d’Hécatée de Milet du VIe siècle av. J.C., Jérusalem remplaçant Delphes comme omphalos du Monde.
fr-->En Orient, Byzance, et peut-être aussi l'Arménie, sont restés un foyer de conservation de manuscrits grecs antiques, prenant en partie le relais d'Alexandrie. Les lettrés des communautés juives établies en Mésopotamie, ont sans doute continué à pratiquer l'art du calcul astronomique que les anciens Chaldéens avaient poussé si loin.
fr-->Avec Bède le Vénérable (IXe siècle), l'Occident commence à reprendre en latin l'étude des sciences (voir science du Moyen Âge) avec les arts libéraux et le calcul du temps (comput).
fr-->Pendant ce temps, les Perses, qui se trouvaient au carrefour de la Grèce, de l'Inde, de l'Égypte, et de la Mésopotamie, conservaient peut-être le modèle d'une terre sphérique pour concilier les observations astronomiques, le comput et les connaissances géographiques anciennes.
fr-->Avec la conquête de l'Iran par les musulmans, il y eut à partir du Xe siècle, des astronomes arabo-musulmans, le plus souvent Perses, qui traduisaient et adaptaient en arabe les traités des auteurs antiques et qui développèrent leur science d'une façon plus approfondie.
fr-->Cette situation perdura jusqu'au XIIe siècle environ, époque d'échanges culturels plus fructueux.
fr-->Les contacts avec les Arabo-musulmans firent prendre conscience aux occidentaux de leurs retards dans le domaine scientifique. Albert le Grand et Roger Bacon, qui introduisirent au XIIIe siècle la connaissance issue des sciences grecque et arabe dans les universités occidentales, avaient conscience que la Terre était sphérique. On en vint à développer des enseignements philosophiques beaucoup plus élaborés, intégrant la philosophie d'Aristote notamment. Ptolémée devint la référence en matière géographique et astronomique. Toutefois, la géographie n'était pas véritablement enseignée.
fr-->La conscience de la forme sphérique de la Terre s'accompagna d'une représentation simplifiée des terres émergées : Avant les voyages de Christophe Colomb, par exemple, on pensait généralement que les terres émergées n'occupaient que l'hémisphère nord, et se situaient dans un secteur d'environ 180°.
fr-->Cette représentation était le résultat des récits des missions de franciscains (Guillaume de Rubrouck…) et de dominicains en Asie (empire mongole surtout, où on cherchait à reprendre contact avec des nestoriens), mais aussi Chine, et surtout du voyage de retour par mer de Marco Polo, qui prouvait que l'on pouvait contourner l'Asie par le sud. Le sud de l'Afrique était largement ignoré.
fr-->On prit conscience que la mer Caspienne ne s'étendait pas jusqu'au nord du globe terrestre.
fr-->À partir du XIVe siècle, on sentait bien qu'il était possible théoriquement de faire le tour de la Terre.
fr-->Le livre des merveilles du monde écrit entre (1355-1357) par l'explorateur Jean de Mandeville après un voyage de 34 ans en Extrême-Orient, laissait entendre la possibilité d'une circumnavigation. Même si Jean de Mandeville se présentait comme un chevalier anglais, et au-delà de ses « impostures », la rédaction de son ouvrage en trois versions et en 250 exemplaires, puis sa diffusion dans un ensemble de langues vernaculaires, répandit dans la société moins cultivée d'Occident ces possibilités de circumnavigation, et ne furent pas sans influencer un certain Christophe Colomb, pendant sa jeunesse.
fr-->D'autres références à cette époque furent Marin de Tyr, Toscanelli, l’Imago mundi du cardinal Pierre d'Ailly. Toutefois, on ne connaissait pas avec exactitude la valeur du rayon terrestre (Ptolémée et Ératosthène divergeaient sur ce point) et, bien sûr, on n'imaginait pas l'existence d'autres continents que l'Europe, l'Afrique et l'Asie. Christophe Colomb avait un exemplaire de l’Imago mundi.
fr-->En 1491, Martin Behaim élabora le premier globe terrestre.
fr-->Les voyages de Vasco de Gama (contournement de l'Afrique), de Christophe Colomb (Amérique centrale), de Magellan (tour du monde), de Jacques Cartier (Canada) apportèrent un changement important de représentation :
fr-->un nouveau continent, l'Amérique. On sait que Christophe Colomb n'avait probablement pas conscience d'avoir découvert un nouveau continent (Leif Ericson l'avait atteint vers l'an mil), mais rapidement, on comprit qu'il s'agissait de nouvelles terres, que le Gymnase vosgien appela, à Saint-Dié, Amérique, en l'honneur du navigateur Amerigo Vespucci (1507) (c'est ainsi que la ville de Saint-Dié est marraine de l'Amérique, et accueille régulièrement des congrès internationaux de géographie).
fr-->on commence à entrevoir l'Océanie par les premiers tours du monde,
fr-->des précisions sur les contours des terres émergées, issues des relevés cartographiques,
fr-->un renouvellement des méthodes et techniques de cartographie, avec par exemple la projection de Mercator, qui apparut au XVIe siècle.
fr-->Ainsi les grands voyageurs du XIVe et du XVe siècles Marco Polo, Vasco de Gama, Christophe Colomb, démontrèrent que le monde était plus vaste qu'on ne le croyait, avec la découverte de ce « nouveau monde ».
fr-->En occident (après les astronomes chinois), la révolution copernicienne montra que la terre n'était pas le centre de l'Univers, au sens des forces de la physique.
fr-->Copernic pensa que la Terre décrit une trajectoire circulaire autour du Soleil. L'héliocentrisme était né.
fr-->En fonction des observations, on voyait que la trajectoire de la Terre était une ellipse avec une légère excentricité orbitale : la terre suit un mouvement orbital autour du Soleil. Johannes Kepler décrivit les règles régissant son mouvement.
fr-->Galilée décrivit le mouvement uniformément accéléré, et fit avec sa lunette astronomique de nombreuses observations dans le système solaire (lune, Jupiter, Saturne, taches solaires…).
fr-->Après la condamnation de Galilée en 1633 (pour son ouvrage dialogo sopra i due massimi sistemi del mondo (dialogue sur les deux grands systèmes du monde), Descartes renonça à publier son traité du monde et de la lumière, et conçut son système philosophique (discours de la méthode en 1637, méditations sur la philosophie première en 1641…).
fr-->Isaac Newton découvrit les règles mathématiques qui régissent la force gravitationnelle responsable (dans les grandes lignes) du mouvement des planètes du système solaire (1687).
fr-->On pouvait imaginer d'autres planètes accueillant une vie semblable à celle qui existe sur terre.
fr-->Un tel changement de représentation ne fut pas sans créer certaines difficultés dans les relations entre science et foi. Il est certain que l'interprétation trop littérale des passages cosmologiques de l'Ancien Testament (ou de la métaphysique d'Aristote) a entraîné certaines incompréhensions.
fr-->Avec l'avènement des moyens de transport et de communication modernes, la perception relative de la taille du monde se réduit : toute partie du monde est accessible en un temps bref à l'échelle d'une vie humaine.
fr-->Il est possible d'aller en Chine (par exemple) depuis l'Europe par avion en une quinzaine d'heures. Faire le tour du monde se résume en apparence à un problème de logistique.
fr-->D'autre part, le réseau Internet permet de dialoguer avec une personne à l'opposé de la terre presque instantanément.
fr-->Parallèlement, la taille de l'univers observable par les moyens astronomiques contemporains (radiotélescopes, télescopes spatiaux) nous paraît infiniment plus grande qu'à l'époque des Lumières : le Soleil est une étoile parmi des milliards dans la Voie lactée. Cependant, on n'a pas de preuve directe qu'il existe un système stellaire aussi évolué que le système solaire avec ses huit planètes. On n'a pas non plus trouvé de planète où il y ait la vie. Même si on a réussi à détecter des planètes en dehors du système solaire (donc qui gravitent autour d'une autre étoile que le Soleil), plus de 1000 en 2014, il est bien difficile de savoir si la vie existe sur ces "exoplanètes", et la chance que l'humanité y accède un jour semble nulle (voyages de centaines à des milliers d'années, énergie colossales mises en jeu à embarquer, ...).
fr-->D'autre part, la population mondiale est de plus de 7 milliards d'individus, au lieu de 700 millions environ à l'époque des Lumières.
fr-->Il existe donc de sérieux enjeux d'accès aux ressources naturelles (pétrole, énergie, matières premières, eau), et de répartition des richesses sur la terre, avec les problèmes sociaux que cela pose, et les enjeux géopolitiques que cela représente.
fr-->Les États-Unis ont pris conscience à la fin des années 1980 que leur suprématie sur le monde était menacée par la montée en puissance de la Chine. Le livre La terre est plate : Une brève histoire du XXIe siècle de Thomas L. Friedman fit prendre conscience au peuple américain de la nécessité de se mobiliser autour d'un projet fédérateur. Ce type d'ouvrage illustre la puissance symbolique des représentations du monde sur les phénomènes sociaux.
fr-->L'anthropologie a formé des classifications historiques, géographiques et culturelles des différentes représentations du Monde.
fr-->« Aujourd'hui nous recevons trois éducations différentes ou contraires : celles de nos pères, celles de nos maîtres, celle du monde. Ce qu'on nous dit dans la dernière renverse toutes les idées des premières ». Montesquieu
fr-->Notre monde
fr-->Mondialisation
fr-->Géographie et explorations
fr-->Univers selon l'astronomie et l'astrophysique
fr-->Monde (Univers) selon l'anthropologie
fr-->Dans la fiction
fr-->Monde imaginaire
fr-->Informations, cartes et statistiques sur le monde
fr-->Suivre en direct l'évolution de la population mondiale
fr-->Le centre de l'Univers (audio), les podcasts de Ciel & Espace radio, Jean-François Robredo
fr-->L'Univers a-t-il une forme ? (audio), les podcasts de Ciel & Espace radio, Roland Lehoucq
fr-->Le monde et ses représentations (confrontation des représentations scientifiques, religieuses, ésotériques et philosophiques associées à la Terre)
fr--> Portail de la géographie
fr--> Portail de la philosophie
es-->Mundo es el nombre común que atribuye o significa cuanto concierne al ser humano (a veces se enfatiza diciendo nuestro mundo), más específicamente la experiencia que lo circunda y en concreto aspectos más determinados que abarcan su vida y su civilización. Algo más abstractamente se considera mundo a la naturaleza o el universo físico, humano y social donde se sitúa el hombre y que constituye su entorno. Por otra parte y de forma más reciente, con mundo se alude también al planeta Tierra,[1]​ entendiendo por tanto como otros mundos el resto de planetas o astros presentes en el universo.
es-->El mundo constituye, en su forma conocida o mundo conocido, la materia, el espacio y los fenómenos que nos son accesibles por los sentidos, la experiencia o la razón. El sentido más corriente designa nuestro planeta, la Tierra, con sus habitantes y su entorno más o menos natural. En sentido lato o extenso designa el universo en su conjunto. Las representaciones históricas en general lo reflejan geográficamente con una clase de mapa, el llamado planisferio o mapamundi.
es-->En el contexto filosófico, y más precisamente ontológico, es un concepto abstracto y posee el significado absoluto que le da la reducción fenomenológica: todo lo que no es parte del "yo", todo lo que no es el hombre. Y por otra parte, en modo más concreto, sería la realidad como experiencia, la realidad empírica y objetiva.
es-->El término latino mundus 'ordenado, limpio' se empleó para traducir el término griego κόσμος kósmos '[buen] orden, arreglo, ajuste, compostura, perfección'. Estos términos reflejan la noción prefilosófica de que el mundo en sentido filosófico constituía una construcción intencionada bien organizada. Por eso en la noción grecolatina existían dioses y entes encargados del mantenimiento de la estructura y buen orden del mundo.
es-->En filosofía, el término mundo posee varios posibles significados. En algunos contextos, se refiere a todo lo que conforma la realidad o el universo físico. En otros, puede tener un específico significado ontológico. Mientras que clarificar el concepto de mundo ha estado siempre entre las tareas básicas de la filosofía occidental, este tema parece haber surgido explícitamente solamente al inicio del siglo XX[2]​ y ha sido objeto de continuos debates. La cuestión sobre lo que es el mundo aún no ha sido resuelta.
es-->Para Francisco Miró Quesada hay tres ejes para clasificar las distintas concepciones filosóficas del mundo: el eje materialista-espiritualista, el eje finalista-contingencialista y el eje esencialista-existencialista.[3]​ Por ejemplo, Marx veía al mundo de una forma «materialista finalista» (materialismo dialéctico) mientras que las religiones ven al mundo desde una óptica «espiritualista finalista» (escatología y el fin del mundo) ya sea en su vertiente esencialista (Santo Tomás) o existencialista (Gabriel Marcel). El mecanicismo ve al mundo de una forma «materialista contingencialista», es decir, en el universo no hay razón o finalidad específica para el cual las leyes de la naturaleza sean de una manera, pues pudieran haber sido de otra.[3]​
es-->Parménides
es-->Parménides argumenta que la percepción diaria de la realidad del mundo físico tal y como es descrito en la doxa, esto es, en la opinión común, está errada, y la realidad del mundo es ser como es descrito en alétheia: un todo inalterable, inengendrable e indestructible.
es-->Platón
es-->En su mito de la caverna, Platón distingue entre formas variables e ideas inmutables e imagina dos mundos distintos: el mundo sensible y el mundo tangible.
es-->Hegel
es-->En la filosofía de la historia de Hegel, la expresión Weltgeschichte ist Weltgericht (La Historia Mundial es un tribunal que juzga al Mundo) es utilizada para afirmar el punto de vista de que la Historia juzgará a los hombres, sus acciones y sus opiniones. La ciencia nació del deseo de transformar al mundo en relación al hombre; su meta final es la aplicación técnica.
es-->Schopenhauer
es-->El mundo como voluntad y representación es el trabajo central de Arthur Schopenhauer. Schopenhauer vio la voluntad humana como el noúmeno o cosa en sí kantiana. Él creyó, entonces, que podríamos obtener conocimiento acerca de la cosa en sí, algo que Kant dijo era imposible, ya que el resto de la relación entre la representación y cosa en sí podía ser entendida por la analogía a la relación entre la voluntad humana y el cuerpo humano.
es-->Wittgenstein
es-->"El mundo es todo lo que acaece" o, en otras traducciones, "es el caso", escribió Ludwig Wittgenstein en su influyente Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, publicado por primera vez en 1922. Esta definición serviría como la base del empirismo lógico, que se la suposición de que hay exactamente un mundo, consistente en la totalidad de los hechos, sin importar la interpretación que cada individuo haga de ellos.
es-->Heidegger
es-->Martin Heidegger, entre tanto, argumentaba que "el mundo circundante es diferente para cada uno de nosotros y, sin embargo, nos movemos en un mundo común".[4]​ El mundo, para Heidegger, era aquel en el que siempre éramos "lanzados" y con el que nosotros, como seres en el mundo, debemos llegar a acuerdos. Su concepción de "divulgación mundial" fue elaborada más notablemente en su trabajo de 1927 Ser y Tiempo.
es-->Freud
es-->En respuesta, Sigmund Freud propuso que no nos movemos en un mundo común, sino en un proceso de pensamiento común. Él creía que todas las acciones de una persona estaban motivadas por una sola cosa: la libido. Esta fuerza condiciona toda nuestra visión del mundo o de la realidad, que es fruto del pulso entre tendencias instintivas inconscientes y tendencias represoras superconscientes.
es-->David Lewis
es-->Algunos filósofos, a menudo inspirados por David Lewis, argumentan que los conceptos metafísicos como la posibilidad, la probabilidad y la necesidad son mejor analizados al comparar el mundo a un rango de mundos posibles; un punto de vista comúnmente conocido como realismo modal. Para él existe un número infinito de mundos causalmente aislados y el nuestro es tan sólo uno de ellos.
es-->Markus Gabriel
es-->Para el filósofo Markus Gabriel el mundo no existe pues lo considera un superobjeto. La existencia de un objeto, por definición, se trata de su aparición con características propias que lo distinga de otros objetos en un contexto dado. No así ocurre con el concepto de superobjeto o mundo pues este tendría toda las características de todos los objetos que contiene haciéndolo indistinguible y, por lo tanto, inexistente.[5]​ Markus, al proclamar que no existe un superobjeto o Mundo, termina adoptando una postura filosófica pluralista.[5]​
es-->José Ortega y Gasset
es-->Para el filósofo español José Ortega y Gasset el mundo es inseparable del yo: "Yo soy yo y mi circunstancia, y si no la salvo a ella no me salvo yo". Y todas las conciencias están interconectadas a través de un sistema de perspectivas cuya integración constituye el mundo, la realidad misma.
es-->El mundo es para el Catecismo de la Iglesia católica uno de los tres "enemigos del alma": mundo, demonio y carne. Esta conceptualización negativa del mundo constrasta con el concepto grecolatino positivo de mundus 'todo ordenado, organizado, limpio'. Para la concepción teológica judeocristiana el mundo representa lo "material" o la esfera de la "vida profana", como lo opuesto a lo celestial, espiritual, trascendental o sacro.[6]​ Así, los monjes y monjas de clausura que se encierran en los monasterios renuncian al "mundo". El "fin del mundo" se refiere a los escenarios de la culminación de la historia humana, a menudo en contextos religiosos.
es-->El mundo ha sido representado de muy distintas maneras según las civilizaciones y culturas; muchas de esas representaciones han ido cambiando o no conforme cambiaban o no dichas civilizaciones y culturas. En el ámbito occidental (y más en concreto según la concepción cristiana derivada del Almagesto del cosmógrafo pagano Claudio Ptolomeo), el mundo se dividía en dos partes: lo natural o naturaleza, imperfecto y mutable y situado por debajo de la órbita lunar, y lo sobre-natural, perfecto e inmutable y situado por encima de la órbita de la Luna. El renacimiento del siglo XVI empezó a dudar y a criticar esta visión geocéntrica y cristiana y la fue sustituyendo por otra heliocéntrica y mecanicista.[7]​
es-->La historia del mundo es comúnmente entendida como la comprensión de los principales desarrollos geopolíticos de cinco milenios, desde la invención de la escritura por las primeras civilizaciones hasta el presente. Por otra parte, con la expresión Nuevo Mundo frente a Viejo Mundo nos referimos respectivamente por un lado a América, una parte del mundo colonizada en el despertar de la era de los descubrimientos, y por otro a la parte colonizadora, de historia más conocida. Estas denominaciones se extendieron al ámbito de las clasificaciones zoológicas y botánicas, como por ejemplo en el caso del mono del Nuevo Mundo.
es-->En política, los términos primer, segundo y tercer mundo dividen a los países en grandes grupos. El primer mundo designa a los países capitalistas, ricos o desarrollados económicamente; el segundo a los comunistas y el tercer mundo agrupa al resto de los países, la mayoría pobres, en vías de desarrollo o infradesarrollados. Incluso de se utiliza la expresión cuarto mundo para aludir a los países en que la pobreza es extrema.
es-->La población mundial es la suma de todos los habitantes humanos de cualquier era; de igual forma, la economía mundial es la suma de las economías de todas las sociedades (todos los países), especialmente en el contexto de la globalización. Términos como campeonato mundial, producto bruto mundial, banderas del mundo, etc., también implican la suma o combinación de todos los estados soberanos.
es-->En términos como religión mundial, idioma mundial y guerra mundial, la palabra mundo sugiere una escala internacional o intercontinental sin necesariamente implicar la participación de todo el mundo.
es-->En términos como mapa del mundo y clima mundial, la palabra mundo es utilizada en un sentido desprendido de la cultura humana o civilización, refiriéndose de forma física al planeta Tierra.
es-->El término «mundo» deriva del vocablo en latín mundus, que literalmente significa 'limpio, elegante'; en sí es una traducción prestada del griego cosmos, 'perfección' o 'conjunto ordenado'. El término greco-latino expresa una noción de creación como un acto de establecimiento del orden en el caos.
es-->'Mundo' se refiere a todo el planeta o a la población de cualquier país o región en particular: asuntos mundiales se refiere no solo a un lugar sino a todo el mundo e historia mundial es un campo de la historia que examina los eventos desde una perspectiva global (en lugar de una nacional o una regional). Tierra, por otra parte, se refiere al planeta como una entidad física y la distingue de otros planetas y objetos físicos.
es-->'Mundo' también puede atribuírsele al significado de 'global', 'relativo a todo el mundo', formando usos como Comunidad mundial.
es-->Por extensión, un 'mundo' puede referirse a cualquier planeta u objeto astronómico, especialmente cuando se cree que está habitado, en el contexto de la ciencia ficción o futurología.
es-->'Mundo', en el sentido original, cuando es calificado, también puede referirse al dominio particular de la experiencia humana.
es-->El mundo del trabajo describe el trabajo remunerado y la búsqueda de una carrera, en todos sus aspectos sociales, para distinguirla del área hogareña y del estudio académico.
es-->El mundo de la moda describe el ambiente de los diseñadores, casas de moda y consumidores que hacen la industria de la moda.
es-->Según el World Fact Book (2007):
es-->La tasa de fertilidad (cifras de fertilidad femenina, o cantidad de hijos por mujer) era 2,8 en el año 2000 y 2,59 en 2007. La tasa de mortalidad infantil es 56,11 muertes por cada 1 000 nacimientos. El crecimiento demográfico mundial total es de 1,45 % en promedio anual.
es-->La tasa de desempleo Mundial es el 38 %.
es-->En 2008, se estima que la población mundial fue de 6 671 679 034 habitantes. La densidad poblacional es 48 habitantes por km²
es-->El 50 % de la población humana vive en zonas apropiadas, que corresponde sólo al 5 % de la superficie terrestre.
es-->El IDH (Índice de Desarrollo Humano) en el Mundo es 0,624.
es-->El Producto Mundial Bruto (GWP) es de 48 144 966 millones de dólares según el Fondo Monetario Internacional y 44 784 871 según el Banco Mundial, el promedio es de 46 264 669 millones de dólares y 6 975 dólares por cápita.
es-->La tasa de crecimiento económico del Producto Doméstico promedio Mundial, es el 5,1 % por año.
es-->La esperanza de vida promedio es 65,82 años, 63,89 años para hombres y 67,84 años para mujeres. Según la Organización Mundial de Salud, las 10 causas principales de muerte en 2002 son:
es-->12,6 % de alguna enfermedad cardíaca
es-->9,7 % enfermedad cerebro vascular
es-->6,8 % infecciones respiratorias
es-->4,9 % de VIH/SIDA
es-->4,8 % enfermedad pulmonar obstructiva crónica
es-->3,2 % enfermedades diarreicas
es-->2,7 % de tuberculosis
es-->2,2 % de malaria
es-->2,2 % cánceres de tráquea/bronquios/pulmones
es-->2,1 % de accidentes de tránsito.
es-->Antiguamente se consideraba primer mundo aquellos países de economías capitalistas como Estados Unidos y los países aliados a éste después de la segunda guerra mundial. El segundo mundo incluía países comunistas, como la antigua URSS o China, y a todos los países aliados a éstos o bajo su influencia, mientras que, el tercer mundo, abarcaba aquellos países que tenían una posición neutra.
es-->En la actualidad se consideran países del Primer Mundo los países desarrollados, es decir que tienen gran capacidad industrial, gran avance tecnológico y tienen fácil acceso a gran cantidad de materias primas. Se consideran países del Segundo Mundo a los países que también tienen gran capacidad industrial y un gran avance tecnológico, pero tienen un menor acceso a las materias primas que los países del Primer Mundo. Se consideran países del Tercer Mundo a los países que tienen gran cantidad de materias primas, pero no cuentan con gran capacidad industrial ni gran avance tecnológico y que están vinculados al mercado mundial mediante la exportación de materias primas. Se ha adoptado el término "Cuarto mundo" para referirse a las regiones pobres del planeta pertenecientes al sector capitalista y a los países menos desarrollados de éste, como los sin techo que viven en las ciudades más ricas de los países capitalistas, cuyo nivel de pobreza supera al de los habitantes del tercer mundo.
es-->Las cosmologías mitológicas a menudo representan al mundo como centrado alrededor de un axis mundi y delimitado por una frontera como un océano, una serpiente o similares.
es--> Wikimedia Commons alberga contenido multimedia sobre MundoCommons.
es--> Wikiquote alberga frases célebres de o sobre Mundo. Wikiquote
es--> Wikcionario tiene definiciones y otra información sobre mundo.Wikcionario
es--> Wikinoticias tiene noticias relacionadas con Mundo.Wikinoticias
de-->Die Welt (Eigenschreibweise seit 2015: DIE WeLT) ist eine deutsche überregionale Tageszeitung des Verlagshauses Axel Springer SE. Von den Siegermächten des Zweiten Weltkriegs in der Britischen Besatzungszone in Hamburg gegründet, erschien sie erstmals am 2. April 1946 und wurde 1953 vom Verleger Axel Springer übernommen.
de-->Das Blatt wird dem bürgerlich-konservativen Spektrum zugerechnet. Wirtschaftspolitisch gilt sie als „deutlich marktliberal eingestellt“. In Berlin und Hamburg werden in der Welt tägliche Regionalseiten abgedruckt. Die Zentralredaktion von Welt und Welt am Sonntag befindet sich in Berlin.
de-->Die Welt wird in 130 Ländern verkauft und erscheint im Nordischen Format. Ihre Hauptkonkurrenten sind die Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung und die Süddeutsche Zeitung. Zusammen mit der nicht einzeln ausgewiesenen Welt kompakt hat die Welt eine verkaufte Auflage von 170.560 Exemplaren, ein Minus von 32,1 Prozent seit 2005.
de-->Die Welt ist Gründungsmitglied der Leading European Newspaper Alliance (LENA), in der sie zurzeit mit den ausländischen Tageszeitungen El País (Spanien), La Repubblica (Italien), Le Figaro (Frankreich), Le Soir (Belgien) sowie Tages-Anzeiger und Tribune de Genève (beide Schweiz) in der internationalen Berichterstattung redaktionell zusammenarbeitet und kooperiert.
de-->Die Welt war eine Gründung der britischen Militärregierung und erschien zum ersten Mal am 2. April 1946 zum Preis von 20 Pfennig. Das Konzept der Zeitung war, Fakten scharf von Kommentaren zu trennen, in den Leitartikeln kamen gegensätzliche Standpunkte zur Sprache. Unter dem seit Frühjahr 1946 amtierenden Chefredakteur, dem SPD-Mitglied und ehemaligen Insassen des KZs Bergen-Belsen Rudolf Küstermeier, kollidierte das Blatt mehrmals mit den britischen Besatzungsbehörden, die die Welt als PR-Organ nutzen wollten. Die Auflage stieg bis auf eine Million Exemplare, so dass beim anstehenden Verkauf 1952 an Interessenten kein Mangel herrschte. Für zwei Millionen DM erhielt Axel Springer den Zuschlag.
de-->Unter dem ersten Springer-Chefredakteur, dem rechtskonservativen Hans Zehrer (der bereits 1946 kurzzeitig das Blatt geleitet hatte, aufgrund seiner Vergangenheit aber von den Briten abgesetzt worden war), wandelte sich das einst liberale Blatt zur „großen nationalen Zeitung“, wie sie 1965 offiziell tituliert wurde. Autoren wie Ilse Elsner, Sebastian Haffner und Erich Kuby beendeten allmählich die Mitarbeit. Für die Welt arbeiteten Journalisten wie Winfried Martini, Friedrich Zimmermann oder der ehemalige Pressechef im NS-Außenministerium Paul Karl Schmidt alias Paul Carell, der von 1958 bis 1979 für die Welt schrieb. Dessen damaliger Mitarbeiter Hans Georg von Studnitz sowie konservative Schreiber wie Matthias Walden und William Schlamm prägten kurzfristig den Charakter der Zeitung.
de-->Bei der Springer-Kampagne während der Studentenproteste in den 1960er Jahren gegen Axel Springer wurde auch Die Welt Zielscheibe von Kritik. Die Zentralredaktion der Welt zog 1975 von Hamburg nach Bonn und 1993 nach Berlin, die der Welt am Sonntag folgte 2001 von Hamburg nach Berlin. Von 2002 bis 2013 wurde auch die Berliner Morgenpost im gemeinsamen Newsroom erstellt.
de-->Seit Herbst 1998 gibt es eine wöchentliche Literaturbeilage, die nach der 1925 von Willy Haas gegründeten Literaturzeitschrift Die literarische Welt benannt ist. Von 1997 bis 2002 enthielten die Ausgaben für Bremen und 2002 kurzzeitig in Bayern täglich Regionalseiten, seither nur noch die Ausgaben für Berlin und Hamburg. Die Welt erhielt in den Jahren 2002 und 2005 jeweils eine Rüge vom Deutschen Presserat. Nach 40 Jahren schrieb Die Welt 2007 erstmals wieder schwarze Zahlen.
de-->Seit 2004 erscheint neben der herkömmlichen Welt auch Die Welt kompakt, in der Inhalte der großen Ausgabe auf 32 Seiten im kleineren Format zusammengestellt werden.
de-->2010 übernahm der vorherige Chefredakteur Thomas Schmid die Position des Herausgebers. Jan-Eric Peters wurde Chefredakteur aller Welt-Publikationen.
de-->Am 26. Oktober 2012 gab der Verlag Axel Springer den Plan bekannt, die Redaktion der Zeitung Die Welt noch vor dem Jahresende mit der des Hamburger Abendblattes zusammenzulegen. Die Zentralredaktion wurde in Berlin angesiedelt. In Hamburg blieb nur noch eine Abendblatt-Lokalredaktion bestehen. Dies ist auch im Zusammenhang mit der fünfjährigen Standortgarantie für Hamburg zu sehen, die beim Berlin-Umzug der Bild gegeben wurde und am 30. Juni 2013 auslief.
de-->Mit dieser neuen Strategie steht die weitere Existenz der Welt als Printversion zur Disposition. Der Verlag will im Falle neuer Einbrüche „keine lebensrettenden Maßnahmen“ für die gedruckte Ausgabe mehr ergreifen. Von Bedeutung ist aus dem Welt-Umfeld nur noch die Online-Redaktion und die Welt am Sonntag. Deshalb wurde die gesamte Redaktion auf die Online-Ausgabe ausgerichtet. Alle Inhalte werden online first veröffentlicht, weshalb die Redaktion auch durchgehend von frühmorgens bis zum späten Abend thematisch vollständig besetzt sein muss. Die Medienseite der Tageszeitung fasst den Wandel wie folgt zusammen:
de-->Axel-Springer-Zeitungsvorstand Jan Bayer gab im April 2015 ein klares Bekenntnis zur Zukunft der gedruckten Welt ab. Sie wolle „intellektuelles Leitmedium“ werden, man investiere „sehr konsequent“ in Qualität.
de-->2014 wurde bekannt, dass rund 42 % der gemeldeten verkauften Auflage nicht an Abonnenten oder in den Straßenverkauf gehen, sondern als Bordexemplar oder per Sonderverkauf abgesetzt werden. Der Verlag erhält dafür keine oder wesentlich geringere Erlöse.
de-->Seit Januar 2015 sind nur noch 20 Online-Artikel pro Monat kostenlos abrufbar, für darüber hinaus gehende Abrufe muss ein kostenpflichtiges Abonnement abgeschlossen werden.
de-->Ende 2013 kaufte Axel Springer den Fernsehsender N24 und gab im Februar 2014 bekannt, dass die Redaktion von N24 mit der der Welt zusammengelegt wurden, um multimedial Nachrichten zu produzieren. Zum 1. Januar 2015 wurden die Aktivitäten in der WeltN24 GmbH gebündelt. Zum 29. November 2015 wurde die WeLT am Sonntag und ab dem 30. November 2015 DIE WeLT auf das neue Logo samt Markenauftritt umgestellt.
de-->Zu Anfang 2016 übernahm Stefan Aust – zusätzlich zur Herausgeberschaft – auch den Posten des Chefredakteurs von Jan-Eric Peters. Im Februar 2016 wurde ein neues Redaktionskonzept vorgestellt, nach dem es statt vierzehn acht Ressorts gibt. Auch das Bezahlmodell ändert sich von dem Metered Model auf ein Freemium Model. Aktuelle und schnell erstellte Artikel sind weiterhin frei verfügbar, Hintergrundberichte und ausführliche Reportagen oder Analysen sind kostenpflichtig.
de-->Zum 70-jährigen Jubiläum erschien am 2. April 2016 eine von Udo Lindenberg illustrierte Sonderausgabe.
de-->Die Auflage der Welt wird gemeinsam mit der Welt Kompakt ausgewiesen. In den vergangenen Jahren haben die beiden Zeitungen an Auflage eingebüßt. Die verkaufte Auflage ist seit 2005 um 32,1 Prozent gesunken. Sie beträgt gegenwärtig 170.560 Exemplare im Zeitraum von montags bis freitags. Das entspricht einem Rückgang von 80.668 Stück. Der Anteil der Abonnements an der verkauften Auflage liegt bei 44,6 Prozent.
de-->Entwicklung der verkauften Auflage
de-->Unter dem Namen Welt Online wurde das Nachrichtenportal der Welt-Gruppe im Internet entwickelt. Die Website der Zeitung wurde 1995 gestartet und bietet ein kostenloses elektronisches Zeitungsarchiv aller Artikel seit der Digitalisierung ab Mai 1995. Ein PDF-Ganzseitenarchiv erlaubt ferner das Herunterladen von einzelnen Seiten, ausgewählten Rubriken (z. B. Titel, Deutschland, Ausland) oder einer kompletten Ausgabe der seit dem 9. Januar 2001 erschienenen Nummern.
de-->Am 10. September 2012 wurde der Internetauftritt in Die Welt umbenannt und zum Kern der Veröffentlichungen gemacht. Ziel ist es, einen einheitlichen Namensauftritt aller Medien der Welt-Gruppe zu erreichen, ausgenommen davon ist die Zeitung Welt am Sonntag.
de-->Am 12. Dezember 2012 führte Die Welt als erste überregionale Tageszeitung in Deutschland für ihren Internetauftritt ein Bezahlsystem ein. Nutzer können seitdem pro Kalendermonat 20 Artikel kostenlos abrufen, danach wird beim Abruf eines weiteren Artikels der Abschluss eines Abonnements verlangt. Dieses kostet (Stand September 2013) mindestens 4,49 Euro für einen Monat.
de-->Nach dem ersten halben Jahr mit einer Paywall zog der General Manager der digitalen Welt-Produkte (Welt Digital) bei einer Tagung des Bundesverbands Deutscher Zeitungsverleger eine erste Zwischenbilanz. Die konkrete Zahl der Zahler nannte er nicht; er bezeichnete sie als „ermutigend“. Nach eigenen Angaben betrug die Zahl der digitalen Abonnenten der Welt zum 30. Juni 2013 mehr als 47.000. Diskutiert wird allerdings die Aussagekraft der Zahlen hinsichtlich der Bereitschaft für Inhalte im Internet zu zahlen, da das Abo unter anderem in Kombination mit einem iPad Mini beworben und verkauft wurde. Im Juni 2016 hatte Die Welt mehr als 75.000 digitale Abonnenten. Am 15. September 2015 wurde die digitale Zeitung Welt Edition eingeführt. Sie ist die weiterentwickelte Version der bisherigen iPad-App Welt HD und das erste Angebot, das unter dem neuen Markendach Welt erschienen ist.
de-->Mit der Zusammenlegung von Die Welt und N24 unter dem Dach von WeltN24 hat sich Welt.de zum gemeinsamen Nachrichtenportal gewandelt.
de-->Seit 1999 verleiht Die Welt den internationalen Welt-Literaturpreis, mit dem sie an den Publizisten Willy Haas erinnern will. Der Preis ist mit 10.000 Euro dotiert und wird jährlich vergeben. Die bisherigen Preisträger sind:
de-->Seit 2010 lässt die Kulturredaktion einmal jährlich sog. Künstlerausgaben der Zeitung durch namhafte Bildende Künstler frei nach deren Vorstellung gestalten. Diese Kunstaktionen tragen stets den Titel Die Welt der/des [Künstlername]. Bis jetzt waren das
de-->am 1. Oktober 2010: Georg Baselitz
de-->am 6. Oktober 2011: Ellsworth Kelly
de-->am 5. Oktober 2012: Gerhard Richter
de-->am 11. Dezember 2014: Cindy Sherman
de-->am 10. Dezember 2015: Julian Schnabel
de-->am 24. November 2016: Isa Genzken
de-->Rudolf Küstermeier (1946–1953)
de-->Bernhard Menne (1950)
de-->Paul Bourdin (1950)
de-->Hans Scherer, Adalbert Worliczek, Adolf Helbig (1950–1952)
de-->Albert Komma (1952–1953)
de-->Hans Zehrer (1946 und 1953–1966)
de-->H. F. G. Starke (1966–1969)
de-->Herbert Kremp (1969–1985, mit zwei Unterbrechungen)
de-->Peter Boenisch (1978–1981)
de-->Manfred Schell (1985–1992)
de-->Peter Gillies (1992–1995 und 1985–1988)
de-->Claus Jacobi (1993–1995)
de-->Thomas Löffelholz (1995–1998)
de-->Mathias Döpfner (1998–2000)
de-->Wolfram Weimer (2000–2002)
de-->Jan-Eric Peters (vom 1. Januar 2003 bis 31. Dezember 2006 gesamtverantwortlicher Chefredakteur, seit 1. April 2005 zusätzlich Herausgeber Die Welt / Berliner Morgenpost)
de-->Roger Köppel (2004–2007)
de-->Thomas Schmid (2007–2010)
de-->Jan-Eric Peters (15. Februar 2010 bis Ende 2015)
de-->Stefan Aust (1. Januar 2016 bis 5. September 2016, kommissarisch)
de-->Ulf Poschardt (seit 6. September 2016)
de-->In einem vergleichenden Beitrag zur redaktionellen Behandlung und Moderation von Leser-Kommentaren bezeichnete der Journalist Stefan Niggemeier im März 2008 in der Frankfurter Allgemeinen Zeitung den Leser-Kommentarbereich von Welt Online als „unwirtlichen Ort“ und „als Spielwiese für Rechtsradikale, Spinner und Hetzer aller Art“.
de-->Medien in Berlin
de-->Welt.de – gemeinsame Website von Welt und N24
it-->Con il sostantivo mondo si usa designare il luogo primigenio degli esseri umani che ne comprende tutti gli abitanti e le cose create; si distingue dal concetto di Terra in quanto essa ricopre il significato di mera entità fisica, sulla quale gli esseri che popolano il mondo vivono e che è distinta dagli altri pianeti e oggetti fisici o metafisici che costellano l'Universo.
it-->La definizione di mondo nella lingua italiana affonda nell'espressione latina locus mundus nella sua accezione di "luogo pulito, chiaro, visibile" ovvero quella porzione della Terra, ma anche del cielo, illuminata dalla luce e quindi visibile, identificabile e riconoscibile dall'essere umano. Ma aggiunge anche il valore di "ornamento" e di "elegante" inteso come il "luogo ordinato dove regna la bellezza" insito anche nel greco κόσμος (kósmos) con significato di "ordine, ornamento, bellezza", contrapposto al Χάος (kàos) e che rimanda al pensiero pitagorico ellenistico.
it-->In un contesto metafisico, esso può anche fare riferimento a ogni cosa realizzata nella realtà del Creato, ovvero l'universo.
it-->In un senso più ristretto il mondo sta a significare quanto riferisce o afferisce a una particolare civiltà e a quanto da essa è o fu sviluppato nell'ambito dei suoi confini fisici o metafisici con riferimento alle sue Leggi, alla cultura, agli usi, ai costumi, alla filosofia, all'arte: il "mondo romano", il "mondo ellenistico", il "mondo cristiano", il "mondo arabo" o anche "il mondo d'oggi", inteso come la somma delle cose umane che contraddistinguono i tempi odierni; il mondo dell'Ottocento, il mondo della preistoria. Il mondo è anche, sempre nella medesima accezione, quanto prodotto e significato nei confini di una particolare attività o disciplina umana: il "mondo dell'arte", "della filosofia", "della scienza", "della religione", "del lavoro", "della politica", "della meteorologia", "del calcio", "dell'amore", "dell'urbanistica".
it-->Mondo (filosofia)
it-->Terra
it-->Globo
it-->Stati del mondo
it-->Universo
it--> Wikiquote contiene citazioni sul mondo
it--> Wikizionario contiene il lemma di dizionario «mondo»
it--> Wikimedia Commons contiene immagini o altri file sul mondo
it-->Mondo, in Enciclopedia dantesca, Istituto dell'Enciclopedia Italiana, 1970.
nl-->De Aarde (soms de wereld of Terra genoemd) is vanaf de Zon gerekend de derde planeet van ons zonnestelsel. Hierin behoort ze tot de naar haar genoemde "aardse planeten", waarvan ze zowel qua massa als qua volume de grootste is. Op de Aarde komt leven voor: ze is de woonplaats van miljoenen soorten organismen. Of ze daarin alleen staat is onduidelijk, maar in de rest van het heelal zijn tot nog toe nergens sporen van leven, nu of in het verleden, gevonden. Radiometrische dateringen hebben uitgewezen dat de Aarde 4,57 miljard jaar geleden is ontstaan en het leven maximaal 1 miljard jaar daarna. Sinds het ontstaan van leven op Aarde heeft de biosfeer (het leven) de aardatmosfeer zuurstofrijk gemaakt, zodat aerobe organismen er kunnen overleven, en de ozonlaag kon ontstaan. Die beschermt het aardoppervlak tegen schadelijke ultravioletstraling, zodat leven op het land mogelijk is.
nl-->Het aardoppervlak is voor 71% bedekt met water in de vorm van zeeën en oceanen, de rest bestaat uit continenten en eilanden. Water is noodzakelijk voor het overleven van alle bekende levensvormen.
nl-->De lithosfeer, de buitenste laag van de vaste Aarde, is verdeeld in een aantal rigide platen of schollen, die op een geologische tijdschaal (over miljoenen jaren) langzaam over het aardoppervlak bewegen. Deze beweging veroorzaakt de vorming van gebergten en vulkanisme. Onder de lithosfeer bevindt zich de langzaam convecterende aardmantel. De stroming in de mantel veroorzaakt de bewegingen van de platen en vulkanisme aan het aardoppervlak. Onder de mantel bevinden zich een vloeibare buitenkern (waarin het aardmagnetisch veld wordt opgewekt) en een vaste binnenkern. Dit magnetisch veld beschermt het leven tegen de zonnewind en kosmische straling.
nl-->De Aarde draait om de Zon in dezelfde tijd dat ze 366,26 maal om haar eigen as draait. Deze tijdsduur wordt een siderisch jaar genoemd. Omdat de rotatie van de Aarde om haar as en de baan van de Aarde om de Zon dezelfde richting volgen (vanaf de noordpool gezien tegen de wijzers van de klok in) is de lengte van het jaar in zonnedagen gemeten precies één dag korter, namelijk 365,26 dagen.
nl-->De aardas staat in een hoek van 23,439281° met een lijn die loodrecht staat op het vlak waarin de aardbaan ligt, wat de seizoenen veroorzaakt. De Aarde heeft één natuurlijke satelliet, de Maan, die vlak na de vorming van de Aarde moet zijn ontstaan. De zwaartekracht van de Maan veroorzaakt getijden in de oceanen, stabiliseert de hellingshoek van de aardas en doet de rotatiesnelheid van de planeet langzaam afnemen.
nl-->De Aarde behoort tot het Zonnestelsel, het planetaire stelsel rond de ster die de Zon wordt genoemd. Het Zonnestelsel bevat nog zeven andere planeten en een groot aantal kleinere hemellichamen. De Zon is ongeveer 109 keer zo groot in diameter als de Aarde en heeft een 300 000 maal zo grote massa. Onder de planeten is de Aarde van gemiddelde grootte. De grotere planeten, met name Jupiter, hebben de Aarde gedurende haar bestaan beschermd tegen inslagen door met hun (grotere) gravitatieveld planetoïden en kometen in te vangen of af te stoten. Ook de Maan vangt meteorieten op die anders op Aarde zouden storten.
nl-->De Zon is een van de miljarden sterren die samen het sterrenstelsel Melkweg vormen. Binnen de Melkweg is de Zon een relatief onopvallende ster. De Melkweg zelf is weer onderdeel van de Lokale Groep, een groep van meer dan 40 sterrenstelsels, waarvan de Melkweg een van de grotere is. Deze Lokale groep is onderdeel van de Lokale Supercluster, een van vele superclusters van tienduizenden sterrenstelsels die samen het heelal vormen.
nl-->Ten opzichte van achtergrondsterren heeft de Aarde 23 uur, 56 minuten en 4,091 seconden (een siderische dag) nodig om eenmaal om haar as te draaien. Doordat de Aarde van boven de noordpool af gezien tegen de klok in draait, lijkt het voor de toeschouwer vanaf het aardoppervlak alsof andere hemellichamen (sterren, planeten, de Zon en de Maan) in het oosten opkomen om onder te gaan in het westen.
nl-->De Aarde draait in een licht excentrische baan rond de Zon. Eén rondgang (een siderisch jaar) duurt ongeveer 365,25636 dagen. Daardoor lijkt de Zon vanaf de Aarde gezien ten opzichte van de sterren met ongeveer 1° per dag naar het oosten te bewegen. Dankzij deze beweging komt de Zon elke dag ongeveer 4 minuten later op ten opzichte van de sterren. De tijdsduur die de Aarde nodig heeft om weer in dezelfde positie te raken ten opzichte van de Zon, is daardoor ongeveer 4 minuten langer dan een siderische dag en wordt een synodische dag genoemd.
nl-->De afstand tot de Zon bedraagt gemiddeld bijna 150 miljoen km en de snelheid waarmee de Aarde om de Zon beweegt is 29,783 km/s. De Aarde bereikt het perihelium in haar baan (de plek waar ze het dichtst bij de Zon staat) op 3 januari en het aphelium (het verste punt van de Zon af) rond 4 juli. Het verschil in afstand tot de Zon zorgt ervoor dat de warmte-energie die de Aarde in het perihelium ontvangt, 106,9% is van de warmte-energie die ze ontvangt tijdens het aphelium. Het zuidelijk halfrond ontvangt in de loop van een jaar daardoor iets meer energie dan het noordelijk halfrond. Dit effect wordt echter grotendeels opgeheven door absorptie van het energieverschil door de oceanen (het zuidelijk halfrond heeft een veel groter wateroppervlak dan het noordelijk halfrond) en het effect van seizoenen als gevolg van de helling van de aardas is veel groter.
nl-->Doordat de rotatieas van de Aarde niet loodrecht op de aardbaan om de zon staat, maar daar 23,4° van afwijkt (inclinatie), verandert de hoek waarmee de Zon de Aarde beschijnt, in de loop van een jaar. Samen met de beweging om de Zon zorgt dit ervoor dat er op Aarde seizoenen voorkomen. Voor een waarnemer op het noordelijk halfrond zal de Zon hoger aan de hemel staan wanneer de noordpool naar de Zon toe gekanteld is. Daardoor is de temperatuur in die perioden hoger, terwijl de temperatuur lager is als de noordpool van de Zon af gekanteld is. Binnen de poolcirkels is de Zon zelfs gedurende een gedeelte van het jaar helemaal niet te zien (de zogenaamde poolnacht). In de astronomie zijn de seizoenen vastgelegd afhankelijk van de stand van de aardas ten opzichte van de Zon. De twee punten in de aardbaan waar een van de twee polen naar de Zon gericht is, worden zonnewendes genoemd en de twee punten waarop de Zon precies boven de evenaar staat, de equinoxen. Die vier punten verdelen een jaar in zomer, herfst, winter en lente.
nl-->Voor het noordelijk halfrond geldt dat de afstand tot de zon in het zomerseizoen iets groter is dan in het winterseizoen; de zomer duurt hier dan ook een paar dagen langer dan de winter. Op het zuidelijk halfrond is dat juist andersom. Hierdoor zijn de seizoensverschillen op het zuidelijk halfrond iets groter. Op Mars is dat effect veel sterker, doordat de baan van deze planeet meer van de cirkelvorm afwijkt.
nl-->De Aarde bezit een natuurlijke satelliet, de Maan. De diameter van de Maan bedraagt ongeveer een kwart van die van de Aarde. Er bestaat in het Zonnestelsel geen andere planeet met een naar verhouding zo grote satelliet. De Maan is net als de Aarde een terrestrisch lichaam dat voornamelijk uit silicaten bestaat. In tegenstelling tot de Aarde bezit de Maan echter geen atmosfeer.
nl-->Hoewel de diameter van de Zon ongeveer 400 keer zo groot is als die van de Maan, hebben Zon en Maan vanaf de Aarde gezien toch ongeveer dezelfde schijnbare diameter aan de hemel. Dit komt doordat de Zon zich ook ongeveer 400 keer zo ver bevindt van de Aarde als de Maan. Er kunnen daarom op Aarde zowel gedeeltelijke zonsverduisteringen voorkomen als totale, die net dekkend zijn.
nl-->De Aarde en de Maan draaien om een gemeenschappelijk zwaartepunt in 27,32 siderische dagen. Vanuit de Zon gezien, duurt die omloop van de Maan nog iets langer: de periode tussen twee volle manen (een synodische maand) bedraagt 29,53 dagen. Het vlak van de Maanbaan helt onder een hoek van 5° met de ecliptica. Zonder deze hoek zou er elke twee weken een zons- of maansverduistering te zien zijn.
nl-->De aantrekkingskracht van de Maan zorgt voor getijden op Aarde. De aantrekkingskracht van de Aarde op de Maan heeft ervoor gezorgd dat de Maan een gebonden rotatie vertoont: de omlooptijd en rotatieduur van de Maan zijn even lang. Als gevolg daarvan is vanaf Aarde altijd dezelfde kant van de Maan te zien. Tijdens haar omloop rond de Aarde vertoont de Maan schijngestalten, doordat ze zich telkens in een andere positie ten opzichte van de Zon bevindt.
nl-->De getijdenversnelling zorgt ervoor dat de Maan versneld raakt in haar omloopbaan en langzaam in een steeds ruimere baan om de Aarde terechtkomt. Als gevolg daarvan beweegt ze zich met een snelheid van 38 millimeter per jaar van de Aarde af. Tegelijkertijd wordt ook de rotatie van de Aarde om haar eigen as afgeremd, waardoor een siderische dag op Aarde elk jaar 23 µs langer duurt. In het Devoon (410 miljoen jaar geleden) stond de Maan nog dichterbij en duurde een siderische dag op Aarde slechts 21 uur, waardoor er ongeveer 400 dagen in een jaar vielen.
nl-->De getijdenwerking van de Maan stabiliseert de stand van de aardas. Sommige geleerden denken dat de aardas zonder deze stabiliserende werking van de Maan bloot zou staan aan chaotische veranderingen, die het aardse klimaat veel veranderlijker en extremer zouden maken. Als de aardas zich in het baanvlak van de Aarde bevond, zoals tegenwoordig het geval is bij de planeet Uranus, dan zou complex leven waarschijnlijk onmogelijk zijn vanwege de extreme verschillen tussen de seizoenen.
nl-->Behalve een natuurlijke satelliet bezit de Aarde enkele kleine quasisatellieten. De grootste daarvan, de 3,3 km grote planetoïde 3753 Cruithne, werd in 1986 ontdekt. Aan het begin van de 21e eeuw zijn nog meer objecten met soortgelijke banen ontdekt. Die zijn niet groter dan honderd meter in doorsnede.
nl-->De aardas ondergaat een langzame, cyclische beweging ten opzichte van de Zon, die precessie wordt genoemd, en zich elke 25.800 jaar herhaalt. De precessie zorgt voor het verschil tussen een tropisch jaar en een siderisch jaar. Daarnaast varieert de stand van de aardas ook een klein beetje, met een periode van 18,6 jaar, een beweging die de nutatie genoemd wordt. Ook de positie van de polen op het aardoppervlak verandert, met maximaal een paar meter per jaar. Deze poolbeweging heeft verschillende cyclische componenten, die samen de quasiperiodische beweging worden genoemd. Zelfs de rotatiesnelheid van de Aarde varieert licht, waardoor niet alle dagen precies even lang zijn.
nl-->De helling van de aardas varieert met een periode van 41 000 jaar. Ook de excentriciteit van de aardbaan verandert in de loop der tijd. Er zijn grofweg twee belangrijke cyclische perioden waarmee deze veranderingen plaatsvinden; de langste periode duurt 413 000 jaar, de kortere ongeveer 100 000 jaar.
nl-->Cyclische veranderingen van de baan en rotatie van de Aarde en de stand van de aardas worden voornamelijk veroorzaakt door variaties in de aantrekkingskracht van de Zon en Maan en worden wel Milanković-cycli genoemd. Deze cycli zorgen op het aardoppervlak voor langzame veranderingen in de hoeveelheid en distributie van inkomende zonne-energie. Algemeen wordt daarom verondersteld dat ze de oorzaak van (vaak zich cyclisch herhalende) klimaatveranderingen zijn geweest in het verleden, zoals de zogenaamde glacialen (ijstijden) van de afgelopen 2,5 miljoen jaar, koude perioden waarin het landijs aangroeide.
nl-->De Aarde is een terrestrische planeet, dat wil zeggen dat ze bestaat uit gesteente in plaats van gassen, zoals een gasreus als Jupiter. De Aarde is in diameter, massa, gemiddelde dichtheid, zwaartekracht en sterkte van haar magnetisch veld de grootste van de vier terrestrische planeten in het zonnestelsel.
nl-->De Aarde is bijna bolvormig, maar heeft een geringe afplatting aan de polen (de diameter is van pool tot pool ongeveer 43 kilometer kleiner dan door de evenaar). De vorm is eerder een sferoïde met een uitdijing bij de evenaar dan een bol, maar de precieze vorm (de zogenaamde geoïde) wijkt ook nog eens maximaal 100 meter van een perfecte sferoïde af. Om de geoïde in berekeningen te benaderen worden referentie-ellipsoïdes gebruikt. De gemiddelde diameter van een referentie-ellipsoïde is 12 742 km.
nl-->Dat de Aarde min of meer bolvormig is, werd eeuwen voor onze jaartelling al vermoed, onder anderen door Pythagoras en Aristoteles, en bewezen door Eratosthenes (276-194 v.Chr.). Dit was ook onder middeleeuwse geleerden bekend. Bij maansverduisteringen is de schaduw van de Aarde op de Maan altijd cirkelvormig, ook als de Maan dicht bij de horizon staat. Hieruit kan men afleiden dat de Aarde rond moet zijn.
nl-->De sterkte van het zwaartekrachtsveld van de Aarde varieert aan het oppervlak. Door de draaiing en de afplatting van de Aarde is de valversnelling iets groter aan de polen (g = 9,83 m/s²) dan aan de evenaar (g = 9,78 m/s²). Men heeft als standaardwaarde 9,80665 m/s² gekozen. Deze grootheid wordt aangeduid als gn, ge (hoewel dit soms de waarde aan de evenaar aanduidt), g0 of kortweg g.
nl-->Net als andere planeten is de Aarde opgebouwd uit chemische en fysische lagen. De buitenste laag is een lichte, relatief rigide korst van silicaten, die een wisselende dikte heeft. Onder de continenten ligt continentale korst met een dikte van gemiddeld ongeveer 35 km en een dichtheid van 2,2 tot 2,9 g/cm3. Onder de oceanen ligt oceanische korst, die gemiddeld ongeveer 8 km dik is en een dichtheid heeft van 3,3 g/cm3. De aardkorst bestaat voor 95% uit stollingsgesteente en voor 5% uit sedimentair gesteente. Desondanks bedekt het laatste ongeveer 75% van het aardoppervlak. Het bevindt zich vooral in bekkens in de hogere delen van de korst. Continentale korst bestaat vooral uit stollingsgesteente met een lage dichtheid, zoals andesiet of graniet, terwijl de oceanische korst vooral uit gabbro en basalt bestaat. De derde soort gesteente is metamorf gesteente, dat wordt gevormd uit de andere twee door de groei van nieuwe mineralen in de diepere delen van de korst.
nl-->Tussen de kern van de Aarde en de korst ligt de mantel, die hoofdzakelijk is samengesteld uit ijzer- en magnesiumrijke silicaten en oxiden. De dichtheid is hoger dan die van de korst en neemt toe met de diepte, gemiddeld 3,5 tot 5 g/cm3. De mantel is dankzij de hoge druk binnenin de Aarde plastisch. Dit betekent dat materiaal in de mantel kan stromen. Dicht tegen de kern is de mantel als gevolg van de grote druk rigide, maar naar buiten toe wordt de mantel steeds minder viskeus ("zachter"). De dikte van de mantel bedraagt 2800 tot 2900 km. Afhankelijk van de viscositeit zijn er een onder- en een bovenmantel te onderscheiden met daartussen een brede overgangszone.
nl-->De aardkern heeft een dichtheid van 10 tot 13 g/cm3 en bestaat uit ijzer en nikkel, met sporen van andere elementen. Ze wordt in een vaste binnenkern en een vloeibare buitenkern opgedeeld. De binnenkern heeft een diameter van ruim 2500 km en is, ondanks de temperatuur van ruim 5000 K, door de enorme druk vast. Daaromheen bevindt zich de buitenkern met een dikte van 2200 km, waar een temperatuur van 4500 K heerst. Convectiestromingen in de buitenkern zorgen voor de opwekking van het magnetisch veld van de Aarde.
nl-->De buitenste laag van de vaste Aarde is rigide en wordt de lithosfeer genoemd. Ze bestaat uit de aardkorst en een deel van de mantel. Onder de lithosfeer ligt de asthenosfeer; vanwege de hoge temperatuur en relatief lage druk is dit het meest viskeuze deel van de mantel. De lithosfeer is volgens de theorie van de platentektoniek verdeeld in onafhankelijk van elkaar bewegende tektonische platen, die over de "zachte" asthenosfeer kunnen bewegen en er in feite op "drijven".
nl-->Ten opzichte van elkaar bewegen de platen zich met snelheden van hooguit enkele cm per jaar. Tussen platen kunnen convergente (naar elkaar toe bewegende), divergente (van elkaar af bewegende) en transforme (langs elkaar bewegende) plaatgrenzen bestaan. De beweging zorgt voor vulkanisme, de vorming van oceanische troggen, gebergtevorming en aardbevingen langs de plaatgrenzen.
nl-->Bij divergente plaatgrenzen wordt door opwaartse stroming van heet materiaal in de mantel nieuwe oceanische lithosfeer gevormd. Bij convergente plaatgrenzen schuift de ene plaat onder de andere, door een proces dat subductie genoemd wordt. Alleen oceanische lithosfeer subduceert in grote hoeveelheden, continentale lithosfeer is daarvoor te dik en te licht. Dit zorgt ervoor dat de oceanische lithosfeer voortdurend gerecycled wordt, zodat de meeste oceanische lithosfeer niet ouder is dan 100 miljoen jaar (op geologische tijdschaal gezien relatief jong).
nl-->De massa van de Aarde bedraagt 5,97×1024 kg. In massapercentages bestaat de Aarde uit 32,1% ijzer, 30,1% zuurstof, 15,1% silicium, 13,9% magnesium, 2,9% zwavel, 1,8% nikkel, 1,5% calcium, 1,4% aluminium en 1,2% andere elementen. Door massasegregatie tijdens planetaire differentiatie bestaat de aardkern voornamelijk uit ijzer (88,8%), met kleinere hoeveelheden nikkel (5,8%) en zwavel (4,5%) en minder dan 1% andere elementen.
nl-->Meer dan 47% van de aardkorst bestaat uit zuurstof, zodat de meeste elementen in de vorm van oxiden voorkomen, uitgezonderd chloor, zwavel en fluor (elementen die in gesteente meestal minder dan 1% van de massa vormen). De samenstelling van de Aarde wordt daarom normaal gesproken in oxiden uitgedrukt. Een belangrijke oxide is silica (SiO2), dat als een zuur functioneert en silicaten vormt. De meeste gesteentevormende mineralen zijn silicaten. Ongeveer 99,22% van de gesteenten die de aardkorst vormen, zijn opgebouwd uit elf oxiden. Andere chemische verbindingen komen slechts in heel kleine hoeveelheden voor.
nl-->Het aardmagnetisch veld heeft bij benadering de vorm van een dipoolveld, waarvan de polen op dit moment in de buurt van de geografische polen liggen. Volgens de dynamotheorie wordt het veld opgewekt door convectiestroming in de uit vloeibare metalen bestaande buitenkern van de Aarde. Door de beweging van deze conductieve massa's worden elektrische stromen opgewekt, die op hun beurt het magnetische veld veroorzaken. Convectiestroming in de buitenkern is chaotisch van aard, en dit heeft in de loop van de geschiedenis van de Aarde voor diverse omkeringen van het aardmagnetisch veld gezorgd. De omkeringen vinden met onregelmatige tussenpozen plaats; de laatste omkering was ongeveer 700 000 jaar geleden.
nl-->Het veld buigt geladen deeltjes uit de zonnewind en kosmische straling af. Het deel van de atmosfeer waar dit gebeurt, heet de magnetosfeer. De buitenkant van de magnetosfeer (de zogenaamde bow shock) bevindt zich aan de naar de Zon gerichte zijde van de Aarde op een afstand van ongeveer dertien maal de aardstraal van de Aarde. De botsing tussen het aardmagnetisch veld en de zonnewind vormt de Van Allen-gordels, een paar concentrische ringen om de Aarde waar geladen deeltjes voorkomen. Waar de magnetische polen liggen, kan dit plasma de lagere delen van de atmosfeer bereiken en voor het poollicht zorgen.
nl-->Van het aardoppervlak is ongeveer 70,8% bedekt met water. Dit zijn niet alleen de oceanen maar ook de onder water staande gedeelten van de continenten, die het continentaal plat genoemd worden, en binnenzeeën. De resterende 29,2% van het aardoppervlak is landmassa, waarvan het grootste deel op het noordelijk halfrond ligt. Het land is verdeeld over continenten of eilanden en bestaat uit gebergten, plateaus of vlaktes. Andere vormen van reliëf (landvormen), zoals dalen, kloven, kliffen, duinen, spoelvlaktes, rivierdelta's, kusten of kustvlaktes, worden veroorzaakt door de werking van erosie en sedimentatie. Ook de oceaanbodem vertoont reliëf, zoals een wereldomvattend stelsel van mid-oceanische ruggen, oceanische troggen, submariene canyons, oceanische plateaus en abyssale vlakten. Tektoniek en vulkanisme (meestal aangedreven door de platentektoniek) zorgen voor de creatie van nieuw reliëf, terwijl erosie en verwering dit weer afbreken. Verwering kan worden veroorzaakt door de werking van water (in de vorm van neerslag of grondwater), wind, of temperatuurschommelingen. Andere invloeden op het reliëf zijn de biosfeer (bijvoorbeeld door de opbouw van koraalriffen of het tegenhouden van erosie door plantenwortels), meteorietinslagen en de erosieve werking van gletsjers. Op dit moment in de Aardse geschiedenis is het hoogste punt op Aarde de Mount Everest (8850 m boven zeeniveau) en het laagste punt de Marianentrog (10 925 m onder zeeniveau). De gemiddelde hoogte van het land boven zeeniveau is 840 m; de gemiddelde diepte van de oceaanbodem onder zeeniveau is met 3794 m meer dan viermaal zo groot.
nl-->De buitenste laag van de vaste Aarde, waar bodemvormende processen heersen, wordt pedosfeer genoemd en bestaat uit bodems. Dit is de plek waar de lithosfeer, hydrosfeer, biosfeer en atmosfeer samenkomen en elkaar onderling beïnvloeden. Planten kunnen alleen groeien op plekken waar bodems gevormd zijn, en vormen op die plekken een bedekking van het oppervlak, die vegetatie genoemd wordt. Gebieden met natuurlijke vegetatie bestaan uit landschappen als bossen, moerassen, oerwouden, toendra's, steppes of savannes. In woestijnen is de natuurlijke vegetatie vrijwel afwezig. Ongeveer 13,31% van het aardoppervlak is geschikt als cultuurgrond, 4,71% wordt daadwerkelijk gebruikt voor permanente landbouw.
nl-->Het voorkomen van grote hoeveelheden vloeibaar water aan het aardoppervlak maakt de Aarde uniek en onderscheidt haar van andere planeten. Vanwege dit feit wordt de Aarde wel de "blauwe planeet" genoemd. Tot nog toe zijn geen andere hemellichamen bekend waar water aan het oppervlak in grote hoeveelheden voorkomt. Vloeibaar water was in het verleden aanwezig op de Maan en op Mars en komt wellicht nog steeds af en toe voor op die planeet. Sommige grotere manen van de planeten Jupiter en Saturnus hebben water in hun binnenste, maar niet in grote hoeveelheden aan het oppervlak. Op de exoplaneet HD 189733b, een gasreus, is watergas ontdekt. Het meeste water bevindt zich in de oceanen, maar water komt ook voor in binnenzeeën, meren, rivieren en als grondwater. Al het water samen wordt de hydrosfeer genoemd.
nl-->Zelfs als water opgeslagen als ijs wordt meegerekend, bevindt 97,5% van al het water op Aarde zich in oceanen of zeeën. Dit is zoutwater, van de overige 2,5% is 68,7% ijs en de rest zoetwater. De oceanen bevatten 1,386×109 km³ water, met een massa van 1,35×1018 ton, ongeveer 1/4400 van de totale massa van de Aarde. Als de Aarde geen reliëf had, dan zou dit water het gehele oppervlak bedekken met een 2,7 km diepe laag.
nl-->Ongeveer 3,5% van de totale massa van de oceanen bestaat uit opgelost zout, voornamelijk afkomstig uit submarien vulkanisme of verwering van gesteenten. De oceanen gelden ook als reservoir voor (opgeloste) gassen uit de atmosfeer; deze zijn essentieel voor het overleven van marien leven. De oceanen werken daardoor als een buffer op de samenstelling van de atmosfeer. De oceanen werken ook als warmtereservoir, waardoor de wereldwijde temperatuur geen grote schommelingen kan vertonen. Veranderingen in de warmteverdeling in de oceanen hebben grote invloed op het lokale klimaat, zoals blijkt uit het fenomeen El Niño.
nl-->Het water opgeslagen in ijs wordt wel de cryosfeer genoemd. Het meeste ijs bevindt zich in de poolkappen, vooral op Antarctica en Groenland, maar er is ook water opgeslagen als zee-ijs of in gletsjers in hooggebergtes. Het seizoensgebonden smelten en aangroeien van de ijskappen zorgt voor de toevoer van zoet water naar de oceanen, wat de oceanische circulatie aandrijft.
nl-->Oppervlaktewater zoals in de oceanen staat voortdurend bloot aan verdamping. Bij verdamping wordt water als gas in de atmosfeer opgenomen. Dit kan weer condenseren en als neerslag op het oppervlakte belanden; het vormt daar oppervlaktewater, of dringt door in de bodem en wordt grondwater. Via rivieren stroomt oppervlaktewater naar de oceanen terug. Als het daarna weer verdampt, is er sprake van een cyclus, die de waterkringloop wordt genoemd.
nl-->Grondwater is al het water dat zich in de ondergrond of bodem bevindt. Het is voornamelijk afkomstig van neerslag (meteorisch) of het dóórdringen van zoutwater uit de zeeën in de ondergrond. Water komt in grote hoeveelheden voor tot ongeveer 2 km diepte in de aardkorst; op grotere diepte vormt het verbindingen met mineralen.
nl-->De atmosfeer is de gasvormige laag die om de Aarde heen ligt. De luchtdruk is aan het aardoppervlak gemiddeld 101,325 kPa en de schaalhoogte ligt ongeveer op 8,5 km. De aardatmosfeer bestaat grotendeels uit stikstof (ruim 78%) en zuurstof (bijna 21%), aangevuld met sporen van waterdamp, koolstofdioxide en andere gassen. De atmosfeer eindigt niet plotseling op een bepaalde hoogte, maar neemt naar buiten toe exponentieel in concentratie af. Het onderste deel van de atmosfeer, waar ongeveer 75% van alle massa zich bevindt, wordt de troposfeer genoemd. De hoogte van de troposfeer verschilt met de geografische breedte en varieert van 7 km bij de polen tot 17 km bij de evenaar.
nl-->Vergeleken met andere planeten is de hoge concentratie zuurstof in de aardatmosfeer uniek. Normaal gesproken zou zuurstof door oxidatiereacties bij verwering in relatief korte tijd uit de atmosfeer verdwijnen, maar op Aarde zorgt fotosynthese door planten voor een continue productie van nieuw zuurstof uit kooldioxide. Dankzij de aanwezigheid van zuurstof heeft de Aarde bovendien een ozonlaag die het oppervlak beschermt tegen voor leven schadelijke ultraviolette straling.
nl-->De atmosfeer beschermt het aardoppervlak doordat kleinere meteoren die op Aarde inslaan, door de wrijving verbranden. Door de verplaatsing van waterdamp en door neerslag wordt water naar het land gebracht. De atmosfeer tempert ook de temperatuurverschillen tussen dag en nacht door warmte vast te houden. Gasmoleculen van zogenaamde broeikasgassen vangen warmte-energie op die door het aardoppervlak weerkaatst wordt. Dit effect wordt het broeikaseffect genoemd en verhoogt de temperatuur op Aarde. Zonder broeikaseffect zou het op het oppervlak gemiddeld −18°C zijn.
nl-->De troposfeer wordt voortdurend opgewarmd door zonnestraling, vooral indirect via door het aardoppervlak uitgezonden aardse straling. Buiten de dagelijkse en jaarlijkse gang en klimaatveranderingen zijn de in- en uitgaande straling gemiddeld genomen min of meer met elkaar in evenwicht. Plaatselijk is dit echter niet het geval. Door het verschil in hoogte van de zon valt het zonlicht rond de polen op een groter gebied dan rond de evenaar. Daarom is de insolatie, de hoeveelheid licht die op een stukje aardoppervlak invalt, en daarmee de opwarming van het aardoppervlak rond de evenaar veel hoger. Op breedten lager dan 38° is de instraling groter dan de uitstraling, terwijl buiten dat gebied de uitstraling overheerst. In de tropen en subtropen wordt het echter niet warmer en in de gematigde gebieden en de poolstreken niet kouder. Dit komt doordat er een compenserend warmtetransport is door de algemene circulatie en de zeestromen. De algemene circulatie bestaat uit turbulentie, convectie, advectie en verdamping. De combinatie van dit warmtetransport met de stralingsbalans is de energiebalans.
nl-->In het klassieke model is er sprake van drie circulatiecellen: Hadleycellen, Ferrelcellen en polaire cellen. Deze cellen verschuiven met de seizoenen. Dit model is echter een te grote versimpeling gebleken.
nl-->De aanwezigheid van water in de atmosfeer en het verdampen, condenseren en sublimeren daarvan is van groot belang bij weer en klimaat. Door verdamping kan lucht waterdamp gaan bevatten. Als de lucht warm genoeg is om op te stijgen, daalt de luchtdruk, waardoor de lucht verzadigd raakt en water condenseert. De kleine waterdruppeltjes die zo ontstaan, vormen samen een wolk. Als er genoeg condensatie van water plaatsvindt, zullen de druppeltjes voldoende aangroeien om als neerslag terug te vallen naar het aardoppervlak. De hoeveelheid neerslag varieert per gebied op Aarde tussen de paar meter tot minder dan een millimeter per jaar. De gemiddelde neerslag in een gebied wordt bepaald door de dominante windrichting, het reliëf en temperatuurverschillen.
nl-->Ondanks lokale verschillen kan de Aarde naar breedtegraad worden onderverdeeld in zones met ongeveer hetzelfde klimaat. Vanaf de evenaar tot de polen zijn dit de warme, natte tropische klimaten, de warme en droge subtropische klimaten, de vochtige subtropische klimaten, de koelere, natte gematigde klimaten, de drogere, koelere landklimaten en de koude, droge poolklimaten. Ook de hoogte is bepalend voor het klimaat. Doordat de atmosfeer dunner wordt op grotere hoogte is het daar kouder. Een verdere indeling van klimaten is de klimaatclassificatie van Köppen, waarin de klimaten naar temperatuur en neerslag worden gerangschikt.
nl-->Boven de troposfeer wordt de atmosfeer meestal ingedeeld in de stratosfeer, de mesosfeer en de thermosfeer. Elk van deze lagen heeft een ander temperatuurverloop. Buiten de thermosfeer begint de exosfeer, die overgaat in de magnetosfeer, waar de zonnewind door het aardmagnetisch veld wordt opgevangen. De ozonlaag, die het aardoppervlak beschermt tegen ultraviolette straling, bevindt zich in de stratosfeer. Als definitie voor de grens tussen de atmosfeer en de ruimte wordt wel de denkbeeldige Kármánlijn genomen 100 km boven het aardoppervlak. Die ligt in het onderste deel van de thermosfeer.
nl-->Dankzij warmte-energie kunnen sommige moleculen in de buitenste delen van de atmosfeer een snelheid krijgen die groot genoeg is om aan de zwaartekracht van de Aarde te ontsnappen. Gevolg is dat deeltjes uit de atmosfeer langzaam de ruimte in verdwijnen. Lichte moleculen zoals waterstof of helium bereiken makkelijker de ontsnappingssnelheid.
nl-->De Aarde voldoet aan alle vereisten waaraan een planeet moet voldoen om haar bewoonbaar te maken voor complex meercellig leven. Deze vereisten zijn volgens het huidige begrip het aanwezig zijn van grote hoeveelheden vloeibaar water, het (stabiel) aanwezig zijn van complexe organische moleculen en genoeg energie om metabolisme in organismen mogelijk te maken. Een groot aantal factoren zorgt ervoor dat de omstandigheden op Aarde gunstig zijn voor het ontstaan en in stand houden van een complexe biosfeer. Voorbeelden zijn de excentriciteit van de aardbaan, de scheve stand van de aardas, de rotatiesnelheid, de juiste afstand tot de Zon, de grote natuurlijke satelliet, de bijzondere samenstelling van de atmosfeer, het magnetisch veld en de vulkanische activiteit op Aarde.
nl-->Al het leven samen op een planeet wordt wel een biosfeer genoemd. De Aarde is de enige planeet waarvan bekend is dat ze een biosfeer heeft. Sommige geleerden menen dat planeten met een complexe biosfeer, met intelligent leven, vanwege de vergelijking van Drake wijdverbreid zijn door het heelal, terwijl anderen aannemen dat planeten met een complexe biosfeer juist zeldzaam zijn. De aardse biosfeer ontstond rond 3,5 miljard jaar geleden en heeft zich sindsdien steeds verder ontwikkeld. Ze kan worden onderverdeeld in biomen, gebieden op Aarde die hetzelfde ecosysteem (een samenleving van soorten planten, dieren en andere organismen) hebben.
nl-->Terrestrische biomen (biomen op het land) volgen vaak de klimaatzones op Aarde, die door de breedtegraad en de hoogte bepaald worden. Voorbeelden van terrestrische biomen zijn toendra, taiga, loofbos, naaldbos, gemengd bos, mediterraan bos, savanne, woestijn of mangroves. In de polaire biomen, de toendra's en de woestijnen komt relatief weinig leven voor, terwijl de grootste biodiversiteit per oppervlak gevonden wordt rond de evenaar. Terrestrische biomen zijn voor voedingsstoffen afhankelijk van de bodem en van watertoevoer. Mariene of aquatische biomen zijn bijvoorbeeld koraalriffen, kelpwouden, het continentaal plat, de benthische en pelagische zones van de oceaan, black smokers op de oceaanbodem en waddenzeeën. Mariene biomen zijn afhankelijk van de aanvoer van opgeloste voedingsstoffen vanaf het land.
nl-->Biomen kunnen op een aantal manieren worden ingedeeld. Als alle onderverdelingen meegeteld worden kunnen er tientallen verschillende biomen onderscheiden worden met elk hun eigen ecosysteem.
nl-->In 2008 leven er verspreid over vrijwel de hele Aarde ongeveer 6,6 miljard mensen. Verwacht wordt dat dit aantal in 2050 tot 9,2 miljard zal zijn gestegen. Het grootste gedeelte van de groei zal plaatsvinden in ontwikkelingslanden. De menselijke bevolkingsdichtheid verschilt sterk, maar meer dan de helft van de wereldbevolking woont in Azië. De meest noordelijke permanent bewoonde nederzetting is de plaats Alert op het Canadese eiland Ellesmere, de meest zuidelijke is het zuidpoolstation Amundsen-Scott vlak bij de zuidpool op Antarctica. Verwacht wordt dat rond 2020 60% van de wereldbevolking in steden woont in plaats van op het platteland.
nl-->Op enkele uitzonderingen na, waaronder het vasteland van Antarctica, is het gehele landoppervlak tegenwoordig verdeeld in staten. In 2008 waren er 193 internationaal erkende onafhankelijke staten. Er zijn daarnaast 59 afhankelijke gebieden en een aantal autonome gebieden en betwiste gebieden. Er is in de wereldgeschiedenis nog nooit een wereldregering geweest, hoewel een aantal naties naar werelddominantie hebben gestreefd. De Verenigde Naties zijn een internationale organisatie die tot doel heeft de samenwerking op het gebied van internationaal recht, veiligheid, mensenrechten, economische ontwikkeling en cultuur te bevorderen en gewapende conflicten te voorkomen. In 2008 hadden zich 192 staten bij de organisatie aangesloten.
nl-->In totaal zijn ongeveer 500 mensen buiten de aardatmosfeer geweest, waarvan er twaalf op de Maan gelopen hebben. Normaal gesproken zijn de enige mensen in de ruimte de bemanningsleden van het International Space Station.
nl-->Geschat wordt dat sinds het ontstaan van de mens er zo'n 107,5 miljard mensen op de Aarde zijn geboren.
nl-->De Aarde bevat grondstoffen die de mens ontgint voor consumptie. Sommige grondstoffen zijn niet-vernieuwbaar, waaronder bijvoorbeeld fossiele brandstoffen. Uit de aardkorst zijn grote voorraden fossiele brandstoffen, zoals steenkool, olie, gas en methaanhydraten gewonnen. Deze hulpbronnen worden gebruikt voor de opwekking van energie en bij chemische productieprocessen. Ertsen vormen zich door een geologisch proces dat door magmatische activiteit in de aardkorst en/of door erosie wordt aangedreven.
nl-->De biosfeer levert de mens dankzij domesticatie van dieren (veeteelt) en planten (landbouw) onder andere voedsel, hout, leer en wol. In 1993 was ongeveer 13% van het landoppervlak in gebruik als cultuurgrond en nog eens 26% als weiland voor vee. Slechts 1,5% was in gebruik als stedelijke bebouwing.
nl-->Grote delen van de Aarde hebben regelmatig te maken met natuurrampen zoals cyclonen, tornado's, orkanen en overstromingen. Andere gebieden hebben te maken met aardbevingen, aardverschuivingen, vulkaanuitbarstingen, tsunami's en droogte.
nl-->Sommige gebieden worden bedreigd door gevaren met een menselijke oorzaak. Bevolkingsgroei en economische groei gaan soms gepaard met vervuiling van water en lucht. Industrie en intensieve landbouw en veeteelt kunnen zorgen voor vervuiling in de vorm van bodem-, lucht- of waterverontreiniging, zure regen, overbegrazing, erosie, ontbossing en verwoestijning. De mens neemt, gedreven door onder andere de bevolkingsgroei, steeds meer land in gebruik, wat gepaard gaat met het verlies van habitat en mogelijk als gevolg daarvan het uitsterven van in het wild levende soorten.
nl-->Er bestaat wetenschappelijke consensus dat de mens (mede)verantwoordelijk is voor het warmer worden van het wereldwijde klimaat. Dit komt door de grootschalige verbranding van fossiele brandstoffen, waarbij kooldioxide vrijkomt in de atmosfeer, wat het broeikaseffect versterkt. Een warmer klimaat zal waarschijnlijk gepaard gaan met het smelten van gletsjers en ijskappen, extremere temperatuurschommelingen en het stijgen van het eustatisch zeeniveau.
nl-->Tegelijkertijd is er een milieubeweging op gang gekomen die tot doel heeft de menselijke consumptie van natuurlijke hulpbronnen te verminderen en vervuiling tegen te gaan. De milieubeweging probeert door de bewustmaking van het publiek de politiek te beïnvloeden met als doel duurzamer beleid en bescherming van de natuur. Doordat de veranderingen die de milieubeweging voor ogen staan, vaak in conflict zijn met commerciële belangen, zijn deze veranderingen echter dikwijls kostbaar.
nl-->De meest aanvaarde hypothese over het ontstaan van het zonnestelsel is op dit moment de Zonnenevel-hypothese. Volgens deze hypothese vormde het Zonnestelsel zich uit een samentrekkende interstellaire moleculaire wolk, de Zonnenevel. Tijdens de samentrekking platte de wolk af tot een protoplanetaire schijf. In deze schijf ontstonden de Zon en de planeten door accretie van materie. Het grootste deel van de materie kwam terecht in het centrum en vormde de Zon. Ander gas en stof vormde planetesimalen (proto-planeten), die later uitgroeiden tot planeten, waaronder de Aarde. Kleine objecten als meteorieten worden beschouwd als materie die niet in dit proces is geaccretiseerd. Door meteorieten te dateren heeft men de ouderdom van het Zonnestelsel en daarmee de Aarde bepaald: ongeveer 4,56 miljard jaar.
nl-->Zware elementen zoals ijzer en nikkel zonken al tijdens de accretie van de Aarde naar het middelpunt, waardoor een scheiding ontstond tussen kern en mantel. Een andere belangrijke gebeurtenis in de beginfase was het ontstaan van de Maan (die iets jonger blijkt te zijn dan de Aarde). De meest waarschijnlijke verklaring is een grote inslag, waarbij een kleinere planetesimaal (iets kleiner dan de planeet Mars) op de Aarde insloeg. Het bij deze inslag weggeslingerde materiaal kwam in een baan om de Aarde terecht om daar te accretiseren tot de Maan. Door de enorme hoeveelheid energie die bij de inslag vrijkwam, raakte de aardmantel compleet gesmolten. In de loop der tijd stolde hij en kon zich door differentiatie van materiaal binnenin de Aarde de eerste korst vormen. Uit berekeningen blijkt dat als de Aarde voor de inslag een atmosfeer had, deze tijdens de inslag in zijn geheel verdween. De atmosfeer en de oceanen moeten daarom ontstaan zijn uit later materiaal van inslaande kometen en meteorieten en uit gassen en vloeistoffen die bij vulkanisme vrijkwamen. Deze eerste atmosfeer bevatte meer koolstofdioxide dan tegenwoordig en zuurstof was schaars.
nl-->Het eerste leven moet ontstaan zijn uit zelfreproducerende moleculen in de oceanen, volgens sommige interpretaties al rond 3,8 miljard jaar geleden. Uit simpele organische stoffen ontstonden materialen als aminozuren en nucleotiden, die later uitgroeiden tot eiwitten en RNA, de bouwstoffen voor het leven. Rond 3,4 miljard jaar geleden moet de laatste gemeenschappelijke voorouder van al het leven hebben geleefd.
nl-->Men vermoedt dat een vorm van platentektoniek al in het begin moet hebben plaatsgevonden, hoewel het proces in het begin waarschijnlijk sneller verliep, waardoor de continenten kleiner bleven. Geleidelijk ontwikkelde het proces zich tot de huidige vorm. In de loop van de Aardse geschiedenis komen perioden voor waarin vrijwel alle continenten bij elkaar liggen; dan spreekt men van een zogenaamd supercontinent. De laatste keer dat dit gebeurde was rond 300 miljoen jaar geleden; men noemt dit supercontinent Pangea.
nl-->Over de eerste paar miljard jaar van de Aardse geschiedenis is relatief weinig bekend, doordat fossielen van organismen die uitsluitend uit zacht weefsel bestaan, slecht bewaard blijven. Wat duidelijk is, is dat het leven steeds diverser werd en dat rond 2,3 miljard jaar geleden de eerste autotrofe organismen verschenen, organismen die door fotosynthese zuurstof produceren. De toevoeging van zuurstof aan de atmosfeer had tot gevolg dat er een ozonlaag ontstond en het leven voortaan beter beschermd werd tegen schadelijke straling. Daardoor konden grotere organismen dan bacteriën ontstaan die niettemin nog steeds tot de micro-organismen gerekend worden, zoals eukaryotische cellen en meercellige organismen.
nl-->Volgens een vrij algemeen aanvaarde theorie bevond de Aarde zich ongeveer 700 miljoen jaar geleden in een grote ijstijd, waarbij de planeet van de polen tot de evenaar bevroren was, een theorie die bekendstaat als die van de sneeuwbalaarde. Toen het klimaat warmer werd, begon het leven zich zeer snel te ontwikkelen. Tijdens de Cambrische explosie rond 535 miljoen jaar geleden versnelde de ontwikkeling van het leven zich, waardoor in relatief korte tijd veel nieuwe groepen organismen (dieren, planten, enzovoort) verschenen.
nl-->Sindsdien heeft de evolutie steeds nieuwe en ingewikkeldere soorten leven voortgebracht, een ontwikkeling die soms onderbroken werd door korte periodes van massaal uitsterven, die massa-extincties worden genoemd. Rond 500 miljoen jaar geleden verschenen de eerste planten en insecten op het land (bacteriën en schimmels moeten het land al veel eerder gekoloniseerd hebben) en rond 380 miljoen jaar geleden ontwikkelden in ondiep water levende vissen poten, waarmee ze uit het water konden kruipen. Hieruit kwamen de amfibieën voort, die longen hadden in plaats van kieuwen. Uit de amfibieën ontstonden reptielen en later zoogdieren. De dinosauriërs (reptielen) domineerden gedurende een paar honderd miljoen jaar de Aarde maar stierven tijdens de laatste grote massa-extinctie van ongeveer 65 miljoen jaar geleden samen met vele andere levensvormen uit, waarschijnlijk als gevolg van de zogeheten Yucatan-inslag die tevens de Krijt-Paleogeengrens markeert.
nl-->Vanaf dat moment hebben de zoogdieren zich sterk ontwikkeld. Rond 2 miljoen jaar geleden verscheen de mens. Aangenomen wordt dat mensen uit eerder levende primaten zijn geëvolueerd.
nl-->De huidige ijstijd begon rond 40 miljoen jaar geleden en versterkte zich rond 2,5 miljoen jaar geleden. De poolkappen zijn sindsdien in cycli van 40 000 of 100 000 jaar aangegroeid en weer afgesmolten. De laatste koudere periode (glaciaal) eindigde ongeveer 10 000 jaar geleden. Door de ontwikkeling van de spraak, de ontdekking van de landbouw en het temmen van dieren kon de mens zich snel over de wereld verspreiden en na het ontstaan van beschavingen binnen korte tijd een grote invloed op de biosfeer, de hydrosfeer, de atmosfeer en het landgebruik en de indeling van het aardoppervlak krijgen.
nl-->Volgens de meest gangbare hypothese zal de evolutie van de Zon uiteindelijk het einde van de Aarde betekenen, maar op de Aarde zal al veel eerder geen leven meer mogelijk zijn. Zoals in alle sterren vindt in de kern van de Zon voortdurend kernfusie van waterstof tot helium plaats. Daardoor hoopt zich in de loop der tijd steeds meer helium op in de kern van de Zon, waardoor de luminositeit van de Zon toeneemt met ongeveer 10% in de komende 1,1 miljard jaar en 40% in de komende 3,5 miljard jaar. Over ongeveer 5 miljard jaar zal alle waterstof in het inwendige van de Zon zijn omgezet in helium, met als gevolg dat de Zon zal uitzetten tot een rode reus van rond de 250 maal zijn huidige omvang. Een rechtstreeks gevolg is dat de temperatuur op Aarde sterk zal stijgen, wat in ieder geval tot de verdamping van alle oceanen zal leiden. Over 900 miljoen jaar zal door de hogere temperatuur de hoeveelheid anorganische kooldioxide in de atmosfeer zijn toegenomen tot een concentratie waarbij fotosynthese door C4-fixatie onmogelijk is. Dat betekent dat de meeste plantensoorten niet meer kunnen overleven, waardoor de zuurstof uit de atmosfeer zal verdwijnen. Dit zal dierlijk of menselijk leven ook onmogelijk maken.
nl-->Het opzwellen van de Zon zal ervoor zorgen dat de binnenplaneten Mercurius, Venus en de Aarde in de fotosfeer (de "atmosfeer") van de Zon belanden en worden vernietigd. De Zon zal in dit stadium echter ongeveer 30% van zijn massa verloren hebben, zodat de Aarde theoretisch in een steeds wijdere omloopbaan komt. Dit effect had er normaal gesproken voor gezorgd dat de planeet niet door de uitdijende Zon zou worden opgeslokt, hoewel de nabijheid van de Zon nog steeds al het leven op Aarde onmogelijk zou hebben gemaakt. Uit een recente computersimulatie is echter gebleken dat door de getijdenwerking van de uitdijende Zon de Aarde juist naar de Zon toegetrokken zal worden. Vermoedelijk ontsnappen Mars en de andere buitenplaneten aan dit lot, maar ook op Mars zal de temperatuur zo sterk stijgen dat er geen aardse organismen kunnen leven.
nl-->Het standaardsymbool voor de Aarde is een kruis met een cirkel eromheen. Dit symbool staat bekend als het wielkruis, zonnekruis of odinskruis. Hoewel er ook andere betekenissen aan dit symbool zijn toegeschreven, wordt het meestal gezien als een representatie van de vier windstreken op Aarde. Een andere versie van het symbool is een kruis boven een cirkel.
nl-->De Aarde is in veel culturen gepersonificeerd als een moedergodin, ook wel Moeder Aarde genoemd. Voorbeelden zijn Tonantzin (letterlijk "onze moeder") bij de Azteken, Pachamama bij de Inca's, Bhumi Deva bij de hindoes, Gaia bij de Grieken en Romeinen, Hou-T'u in China of de godin Jord in de Noorse mythologie. In de Griekse mythologie was de aardgodin de vrouw van de hemelgod Uranos. In de Egyptische mythologie was de Aarde echter een mannelijke god, Geb, terwijl de hemel (Noet) juist vrouwelijk was.
nl-->In de meeste religies komen scheppingsverhalen voor, waarin de Aarde op bovennatuurlijke manier door een godheid wordt geschapen. Ook tegenwoordig gelooft een aantal religieuze groepen, bijvoorbeeld uit christen- of moslimfundamentalistische hoek, in een letterlijke interpretatie van oude religieuze teksten. Deze creationisten geloven niet in de conventionele wetenschappelijke theorieën over de vorming van de Aarde en het ontstaan en de evolutie van het leven.
nl-->In de loop der wereldgeschiedenis is de kennis van de Aarde en haar oppervlak steeds toegenomen. Vanaf de Oudheid is in diverse culturen geloofd in een platte Aarde; zo zagen de Mesopotamiërs de Aarde als een platte schijf die in een oceaan dreef.
nl-->Toch waren er vanouds al mensen die inzagen dat de Aarde bolvormig was. De eersten die een bolvormige Aarde voorstelden, waren Griekse natuurfilosofen als Pythagoras. Zij constateerden dat tijdens een maansverduistering de schaduw van de Aarde altijd cirkelvormig is, ongeacht of de maan hoog aan de hemel of dicht bij de horizon staat. Eratosthenes berekende de omtrek op 15 procent nauwkeurig.
nl-->In de Middeleeuwen was het concept van een bolvormige Aarde in het Midden-Oosten, Europa en India wel bekend, maar nog niet overal algemeen aanvaard. Middeleeuwse geleerden als Beda en Thomas van Aquino wisten dat de Aarde bolvormig was. Anderen, zoals de zesde-eeuwse ontdekkingsreiziger Kosmas Indikopleustes, zagen de Aarde echter als een platte schijf. Ferdinand Magellaan maakte in 1522 als eerste een reis om de wereld, waarmee het pleit voorgoed beslecht werd.
nl-->Dat de Aarde om de Zon draait, is veel moeilijker vast te stellen en was dan ook niet vanouds bekend. Tot de Middeleeuwen werd de Aarde algemeen als centrum van het universum gezien: dit concept wordt geocentrisme genoemd. Pas na sterrenkundige ontdekkingen van onder anderen Nicolaas Copernicus (1473 - 1543) en Galileo Galilei (1564 - 1642) kwam het besef op dat de Aarde geen centrale positie in het Heelal inneemt. Het geocentrisme maakte plaats voor het idee dat de Aarde rond de Zon draait, het heliocentrisme.
nl-->Na de Middeleeuwen nam de kennis van de wereld toe door ontdekkingsreizen. Dankzij betere technieken in de kartografie, navigatie en landmeetkunde bleef ook in de Nieuwe Tijd de geografische kennis van de ligging en aard van de continenten en het aardoppervlak groeien. Ontdekkingen in de geologie, met name vanaf de 19e eeuw, vergrootten de kennis van het binnenste van de Aarde en brachten het inzicht van de hoge ouderdom van de planeet. De kennis van de atmosfeer en het klimaat stegen met de opkomst van de meteorologie en klimatologie in de 20e eeuw. Door de technologische ontwikkeling in de 20e eeuw is zowel in de wetenschap als onder een breder publiek het beeld van de Aarde sterk veranderd. In 1959 werd de Aarde voor het eerst uit de ruimte gefotografeerd door de ruimtesonde Explorer 6.
nl-->De wetenschappelijke kennis leidde tot het inzicht dat de verschillende onderdelen van de Aarde één systeem vormen, die in een fragiel evenwicht staan dat in het verleden vaak veranderd is en in de toekomst opnieuw kan veranderen. Een vergaande vorm van dit inzicht is de Gaia-hypothese, die stelt dat de hele biosfeer als één groot organisme functioneert.
nl-->Aardrijkskunde
nl-->Aardwetenschappen
nl-->Eigentrillingen van de Aarde
nl-->Lijst van landen (doorverwijspagina)
nl-->Systeem Aarde
